 Salvation could be on the horizon for <loc>Britain</loc>’s stagnant living standards as investment in innovation is at its highest level in almost 30 years.
Workers need to churn out more for every hour worked if wages are to rise significantly, but since the financial crisis productivity has barely budged.
So far there is little sign of the additional investment leading to extra output, but officials hope it can generate cutting- edge technologies for the future, turning around the miserable performance of recent years.
R&D spending amounted to 1.15pc of GDP in 2017, the Bank of <loc>England</loc> found - the highest since 1990.
It is up from a low of less than 1pc between 2003 and 2006.
Yet productivity growth has struggled with output per hour worked increasing only very slowly.
Ben Broadbent, the Bank of <loc>England</loc>'s deputy governor, suspects it did not grow at all last year, and the Bank has cut its 2019 forecasts for productivity growth to just 0.25pc despite the surge in research spending.
This is a serious problem for the economy and for households as higher productivity - the ability to produce more output in every hour worked - is the foundation of greater prosperity. It has slowed almost to a halt since the financial crisis.
Economists at the Bank hope this R&D spree may be at least laying the ground for future productivity growth.
“New discoveries tend to take time to implement and evidence suggests it can take between two and six years on average to boost productivity growth within firms,” said the Bank’s Inflation Report.
There is also a risk that new developments and discoveries are not being acted on as companies hold back spending on investment, whether in physical capital or "intangibles" such as training and management.
“While the pickup in R&D spending could boost productivity growth in coming years, many of the factors that have weighed on productivity growth over the past decade are expected to persist,” the Inflation Report said.
Despite the rise in R&D spending in the <loc>UK</loc>, it remains still relatively low by international standards.
Jagjit Chadha, director of the National Institute for Economic and Social Research, said: “There has been an increase but it is still far below international comparators which are generally at 2pc or more, so the level of R&D spending is still low. Excluding Italy, the <loc>UK</loc> is far behind its G7 comparators.”
Companies have also cut back investment spending, citing political uncertainty as a key risk, as well as the slowing global economy.
“After doing the R&D, a level of investment is required at a firm in order to enact any action on it to boost productivity,” said economist Tej Parikh of the Institute of Directors.
“The story in the <loc>UK</loc> since 2008 is one of a high level of risk-aversion, so it may be that the complementary investments have not gone alongside the R&D.”
He also notes that the breakdown between the research component and the development aspect is important. It may be that researchers are receiving more money to create knowledge, but that it has not yet successfully been through the development process required to turn it into useful, productive investments.
Economist David Owen at Jefferies suspects part of the problem is a short-termist approach to R&D often taken by businesses, compared with a longer-term "pure science" approach of government and university research.
He also fears business activity can sometimes be relabelled as R&D to take advantage of tax incentives to innovate.
“Lots of innovation is driven by fundamental research which the private sector doesn’t necessarily do,” he said.
“The pure science in government labs or universities is not done for profit and might bear fruit only in 20 years’ time, or it might not work at all. But when it does that investment pays much higher dividends in the long-term.”
