 THE right-hand man of Venezuela's interim president has drawn up a six-point plan to revitalise the economy when the Maduro regime is overthrown. The blueprint is designed to open up the world's largest oil reserves to international investment by private enterprises.
Speaking exclusively to The Sunday Telegraph, congressman Juan Mejia of the national assembly revealed the existence of an economic proposal, which is being developed by a freshly appointed committee and presented at roadshows around the country with interim president Juan Guaido. Mr Mejia also revealed the opposition is holding informal talks with the International Monetary Fund.
Mr Mejia is leading the effort to prepare for transition as pressure on the Nicolas Maduro regime, including fresh US oil sanctions, increases.
The plans include: a free-floating exchange rate for the inflation-hit bolivar; opening up the oil producing sector to private competition; commencing formal talks with the World Bank and IMF about debt restructuring; moving to a cash-based social security system (rather than one based on goods); independent regulatory agencies; and an end to money printing to pay for government spending. These steps reflect a fundamental commitment to "liberalise the economy", Mr Mejia said.
He added: "While Maduro and his allies look at the state as a provider of goods and services, we believe that the state should be an ally of the private sector in order to solve the people's needs." Mr Mejia and fellow transition committee chairman Jose Guerra, an economist, also want to introduce fixed-term limits for politicians - such as in the US.
Economists say that it is incredibly hard to know how much Venezuela owes and to whom. Alberto Ramos, of Goldman Sachs, said it could take "a generation" to establish the extent of the country's debts. However, given Venezuela's huge natural resource wealth, economists are optimistic that, given a period of political stability, the country can prosper once more.
The socialist regimes of Hugo Chavez and Maduro sought to redistribute wealth through the country via subsidised goods. This "did not work", Mr Mejia said. He cited the example of petrol, which had attracted $140bn of subsidies since Mr Chavez took power in 1999. The humanitarian crisis in the country - which has resulted in the average Venezuelan losing 11kg, or 24lb, of body weight in 2017 - necessitated some wealth transfers, Mr Mejia said. He favours cash handouts. This would give people more choice. He added: "Who better than a mother to know what to buy for her children?" Rather than a culture of politically motivated and corrupt handouts, the new opposition would "put trust back into people by giving them their independence," Mr Mejia said.
On the significant problem of removing the military's grip on PDVSA, the national oil company, Mr Mejia was more circumspect. "It's very tricky for the opposition to hold talks freely with the military," he said.
Analysis: Page 5
