 There are now some $247 trillion (€215 trillion) in IOUs from governments, businesses and households sitting out there in the world economy. That's more than three times the value of all the goods and services produced by all the world's economies combined. The size of America's government debt tops its gross domestic product, a level that scholars say is associated with protracted slowdowns in economic growth. US companies will have to refinance $4 trillion of debt in the next five years. And emerging market countries such as Turkey, South Africa, Brazil, Argentina and Mexico will have to roll over about $4 trillion in debt by the end of 2020, much of it denominated in dollars. Should we worry? Some 17 years ago, Vice-President Dick Cheney said "deficits don't matter," bringing down on his head the derision of academics and policymakers. Deficits allow us to party and leave the bills for our grandchildren. They trigger inflation and eventually recession. They crowd out private investment. That has been economists' charge sheet. So certain are economists and politicians of these dire consequences that even Donald Trump, the self-styled "King of Debt", felt it a vote-winner to promise to eliminate the national debt in the eight years he planned to serve. In the event, it's risen by almost $2 trillion. Now, the received wisdom is challenged. The US is on the verge of trillion-dollar deficits, the national debt clock is ticking at full speed and guess what — the economy is growing, we have full employment with half a million jobs created in the past two months alone, inflation is nil, and there is so little crowding out of private investment that companies are awash in cash they can't profitably use, and are returning it to shareholders. The road to recession just might not be paved with deficits, but with a failure to incur them. Deficits have always been attractive to the left in America. Debtors at the turn of the 19th century hoped that cheap money, untethered from a gold standard, would drive inflation up and the real cost of interest payments down. Later, during the Great Depression, liberal policymakers latched on to John Maynard Keynes's call for deficit spending as a solution. Now, the ascendant left-wing of the Democratic Party is seeking to eliminate Paygo, the rule that requires Congress to offset spending increases with comparable reductions in other programmes, or new taxes. They want to retain current entitlements and spend lavishly on new ones, financing the lot by increasing the deficit. As for paying down the $22 trillion national debt, fuhgeddaboudit. Trump solved the overindebted problem of several of his enterprises with serial bankruptcies, and isn't losing sleep over the burgeoning national debt. As for Democrats, former Treasury secretary Larry Summers argues that with the government paying only 2%-3% on its debt, it is better to use new funds for investment in infrastructure than to pay down debt. Never mind that many government projects prove to be loss-making white elephants. The left has a partner in its lack of concern about deficits. Trump and his Republican allies have massively cut taxes, driving up the national deficit and debt. They, and several respectable economists, say the deficits will prove self-liquidating: they will stimulate such rapid growth that the Treasury's total take will increase. This is irresistible to politicians who tremble at the thought of reducing entitlement spending, and to Republican politicians loath to cross the man whose followers turn out in droves for Republican primaries. Believers in balanced budgets also face the problem that the austerity programmes needed to cut deficits have proven both economically debilitating and politically unsettling. In Greece, German-imposed austerity dealt such a blow to the economy and political stability that the country has yet to recover. In Britain, austerity cost the Conservatives their reputation for sound economic management and gave the hard left an effective slogan — "End Austerity". Those experiences have thrown debt-aversion into ill repute. The bad news is that a new group of nonbank lenders has appeared, willing to make mortgage loans on what might be called relaxed standards. Although less toxic, these loans are akin to those made by banks to Ninja borrowers (no income, no job or assets) before 2008. No pay slips necessary, income from renting via Airbnb and taking in roommates counts in assessing affordability of the $34bn of unconventional mortgages written in January-September last year. The good news is that regulators have finally begun to look into the various non-bank mortgage lenders, a third of which are not profitable, to see whether they can withstand hard times. On the corporate side, The Wall Street Journal reports that the same agencies that gave AAA ratings to bundles of Ninja mortgages are allowing "larger companies ... to load up on debt to fund acquisitions without taking away their investment-grade ratings ... giving investors a false sense of security about the safety of their holdings". In the end, as Warren Buffett famously warned: "Only when the tide goes out do you discover who's been swimming naked." If the US or weaker economies stumble, the incomes of their alreadyindebted governments will fall, as will the incomes of many households. Or lenders might demand higher interest rates from nations and companies trying to refinance existing loans. In either case, borrowers might be forced to cut other spending, triggering a recession. Then, the tide will go out. The resulting sight might not be pretty. irwin@irwinstelzer.com Irwin Stelzer is a business adviser The US left has a partner in its lack of concern about deficits — Trump CREDIT: Irwin Stelzer
