 British manufacturers are stockpiling goods at the fastest rate since records began in preparation for a disorderly Brexit, according to a closely followed economic monitor.
With less than 60 days to go before Britain is due to leave the European Union, the lack of political certainty is putting pressure on margins, supply chains and storage facilities, manufacturers warn as they rush to hoard raw materials and parts.
Inventory holdings in January rose at the fastest pace since 1992, according to the purchasing managers’ index compiled by IHS Markit.
Stockpiling has gathered pace amid concerns Britain could crash out of the EU without a deal, bringing trade problems and a potential shortage of goods.
Several leading companies, including WH Smith, Fortnum & Mason, Tesco and Siemens, have announced plans to hold extra stock. Unilever became the latest to outline its preparations when it said it was raising stocks of some brands of ice-cream.
The PMI survey asks businesses whether conditions are better, worse or the same on a variety of subjects, such as the level of new orders and purchasing intentions, before taking the net position of the responses. Any reading above 50 represents expansion. Until now, stockpiling has helped to sustain growth, but it was unable to provide a significant boost to output in January.
The latest index read 52.8, from 54.2 in December and its second-weakest level since the EU referendum vote in July 2016. Economists had been expecting a reading of 53.5.
The news caused sterling to weaken, sliding 0.32 per cent against the dollar to $US1.3038.
It marks a reversal from last month’s findings, which showed that activity in the manufacturing sector was growing at its fastest rate in six months. Economists had warned the impact of stockpiling was likely to be short-lived.
Samuel Tombs, of Pantheon Macroeconomics, said: “Contingency planning for a no-deal Brexit is providing only limited support to manufacturers at a time of weakening underlying demand, both in the domestic and export markets.” Small and medium-sized businesses are finding it more difficult to cope with the operational challenges.
Rob Dobson, director at IHS Markit, said: “Despite the temporary boost provided by clients’ pre-purchases and efforts to build up stocks, the underlying trends in output and new orders remained lacklustre at best.” THE TIMESCOMMENTARY P23
