 Companies are scaling back spending and hiring plans more ferociously than at any time for nine years amid uncertainty about Brexit, a survey of finance chiefs has found. Executives at some of the biggest British businesses are prioritising measures to drive down costs to shore up their balance sheets, according to Deloitte's quarterly survey of chief financial officers. Uncertainty over the terms of the UK's departure and its future trading relationships is increasingly weighing on businesses' investment plans. Nissan, the Japanese carmaker, cited Brexit as a factor in its decision at the weekend to scrap plans to build its new X-Trail model in Sunderland. Deloitte's fourth-quarter survey polled 110 finance chiefs, including those at FTSE 100 and FTSE 250 companies as well as the British subsidiaries of overseas businesses. It found 78 per cent were braced for a deterioration in the long-term business environment. Seventy-nine per cent were pessimistic in the third quarter last year. "Uncertainty over Brexit is driving a marked shift towards defensive balance sheet strategies among British businesses," Ian Stewart, chief economist at Deloitte, said. "With the UK's growth prospects heavily dependent on the so far uncertain nature of its exit from the EU, corporates are cutting back on capital expenditure and hiring, focusing instead on cost reduction." Lowering costs and boosting cashflow are the top priorities for finance chiefs, with the focus on cost-cutting now heavier than at any point in the past nine years, according to Deliotte. Its findings came as the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales reported that businesses were suffering a further slump in confidence as they grew increasingly frustrated with the gridlock in Westminster. In the days before Theresa May's withdrawal agreement was rejected by MPs, corporate sentiment sank to even greater depths than those reached in the immediate aftermath of the referendum vote in June 2016. The institute's business confidence monitor was -16.4 for the quarter, compared with -12.3 for the previous quarter. It found that confidence had fallen in all sectors apart from IT, property, construction and retail. Michael Izza, chief executive of the institute, said sentiment could deteriorate still further if uncertainty over Britain's future trading relationship with the EU continued. He said company directors were relying on "guesswork" when anticipating the impact of Brexit on business models. "Companies are making decisions now about jobs, supply chains, headquarters and asset locations — incurring significant and possibly unnecessary cost and upheaval," he said. Continuing uncertainty is also likely to weigh on growth this year, according to the EY Item Club, which said that the country could fall into recession in the event of a no-deal Brexit and that the economy would grow by 1.5 per cent if a deal was secured. Business investment will remain subdued in the first half of 2019 amid Brexit uncertainties, though it is expected to improve later in the year. Mark Gregory, EY's chief economist, said the findings highlighted "the potential magnitude of the economic impact" of a no-deal Brexit. "A prudent approach to risk management for companies would be to stress test their business, and especially their cashflow, against a short period of severe disruption, followed by a period of low or flat growth." CREDIT: Ben Martin, Gurpreet Narwan
