 Ireland is in the best possible position to deal with whatever Brexit outcome transpires, according to a senior economist. "It's hard to think of any economy that wouldn't want Ireland's growth, to be in Ireland's position at the moment," Neil Gibson, chief economist with EY, the consulting group, said. "Brexit is definitely a challenge, but it isn't a bad challenge to have, given the strength of Ireland at present. It was never going to be a pleasant experience, but at least it will be done with the benefit of a strong performance in the labour market." Professor Gibson was speaking in light of the publication of the latest edition of EY's economic eye, a snapshot of the state of the Irish economy, which forecasts marginally reduced growth for 2019. However, the report makes that prediction on the back of a "weaker global growth outlook" rather than the specific challenges of Brexit, which Ireland is approaching "from a position of considerable strength". The report projects full-year GDP growth of 8.3 per cent for 2018, 3.9 per cent for 2019 and 3.2 per cent for 2020. The latter two predictions have been revised slightly downward from the previous EY forecast of 4.4 per cent and 4 per cent, respectively, made in November. This is dependent on trading conditions remaining unchanged between the UK and the EU with the adoption of a Brexit transition agreement. The same conditions lead to a forecast of 56,000 net additional jobs in 2019 and 44,100 in 2020, which the report states will be "required to support the country's ambitious growth plans". The industry that will benefit most on the back of that growth will be the construction sector, which is predicted to gain an additional 39,100 jobs by 2024. Wage increases will average 3.6 per cent this year, "reflecting a tightening labour market". The report also offers a second scenario, that of a "fractious" no-deal Brexit, resulting in far lower GDP predictions of 2.5 per cent and 1.4 per cent in 2019 and 2020, respectively, while employment growth would fall to the tune of 28,000 jobs in 2020. Professor Gibson acknowledged that such a downturn was less severe than that outlined in recent Brexit predictions released by the Department of Finance. Stating that forecasting for such an eventuality was "challenging", he reiterated his publication's view, stating that it was based on two fundamental differences from the assumptions made by the department. "We have factored in a greater transfer of activity into other performing sectors, from which a bit more capability of labour might become available," Professor Gibson said. "Secondly, we believe that the department's predictions surrounding the effect on consumer confidence of Brexit will be less severe, as if you look at the behaviour of consumers since the vote, the only thing that influences that confidence is less money in people's pockets." He said there was pressure on both sides to reach a deal. "It's always difficult to speculate," he said. "However, it's important to reflect on the troubles being seen with Italy's banking system, a slower economy in Germany and the yellow vests in France at present. That heightens the need to find a solution from the EU's point of view, even if it means buying more time. "The economic climate has changed. Britain is still the sixth biggest economy in the world. It's important to still have a relationship." CREDIT: Cianan Brennan Ireland Business Reporter
