 A short video clip has been getting attention on YouTube that shows Mairead McGuinness, vicepresident of the European parliament, expertly silencing a pro-Brexit heckler during a debate on the UK's departure from the European Union. "This is not the House of Commons," she quipped as she steered the debate back to civility and substance. Ms McGuinness comes from Co Louth and is the MEP for the midlands and northwest of Ireland, including the border region. She knows as well as anybody the threat to the peace, security and economic wellbeing of that region that a disorderly Brexit poses. She has been an unflappable presence on British television, explaining the mechanics of the European Union's approach to Brexit and defending the backstop arrangements in place to prevent the return of a border on the island of Ireland. Ms McGuinness illustrates the importance of articulate and convincing Irish voices at the top of European institutions. When the UK leaves the EU the need for such voices will be even greater because Ireland will need to engage with Brussels in a different way. Our British allies and friends will be gone; the risk is that the Irish voice on matters in which we go against the views of our European peers will be much weakened. Last week showed that Ireland is well able to produce high-calibre candidates for top European jobs. Philip Lane, governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, looks certain to be the next chief economist of the European Central Bank, one of the most important positions in European financial and economic policymaking. He will get the post thanks to his credentials as an economist, not because he is Irish. But given the vast influence of the ECB and the need for reform of the eurozone, an Irish voice at the top of the bank will add to the diversity of opinion within an institution badly in need of a continent-wide perspective. Ireland has often been represented at the EU level by strong and effective people. The late Peter Sutherland deregulated the airline and telecoms markets during his stint as competition commissioner in the late 1980s, clearing the skies for the carriers such as Ryanair, which have transformed the way Europeans travel around their continent. Ray MacSharry was the first agriculture commissioner with the courage to reform the Common Agricultural Policy, in the early 1990s. Other notable Irish people have been effective in other and more discreet roles. Catherine Day was the first woman to be secretary-general — the top civil servant — at the European Commission. David O'Sullivan, one of the architects of the European diplomatic service, has been the EU ambassador to the United States since 2014. Sending the brightest and best to Brussels or Frankfurt does not mean that they will wear the green jersey. To do so would be inappropriate and immediately disqualify them. In any case, Ireland's interests are increasingly aligned with those of the EU, as the Brexit negotiations have demonstrated. It is up to the government of the day, and Irish MEPs, to make the case for or against controversial issues such as corporate tax or a common defence policy. The best argument for continuing to send our smartest diplomats and policymakers to Europe is that the EU, even after the UK leaves, will continue to have enormous global influence, and it is vital that Ireland has a say in how it uses that influence and where it projects its power. This is the very stuff of day-to-day international affairs. If Ireland is to continue to have clout in the corridors of European power, however, it is essential that its young people learn European languages. We have a poor record on this front, and it must improve if our voice is to be heard loudly and clearly.
