 WITH a degree in economics and politics, you would think it would be easy to land a top job, but instead, 25-year-old Hawa Sissilia Kebe found herself working in retail. And she is not alone. Three in 10 graduates are in jobs that do not need a degree, and many of us end up in roles that are not even related to the qualifications we hold. "I had started applying to economicsrelated graduate jobs, such as data analyst, junior economist or civil servant economist, although my dream role would be in international development or working for a policy advisory firm," says Kebe. "I was unlucky in all. So, I settled for a retail job for a couple years, alongside some graduate-level internship. It diminished my confidence and my motivation to pursue my dream career because, for a long time, I felt that I worked beneath my skill-set. "I remember thinking I needed a mentor, maybe someone who could guide me on to the correct path, or someone who could give me information that was not accessible to me." Fortunately, the Department for Work and Pensions had recently rolled out a mentoring circle programme, and Kebe's work coach recommended her for the opportunity. "The mentoring circle really helped me with identifying my strengths," Kebe, inset right, says. "There were three sessions hosted by different mentors from well-recognised firms; KPMG, Transport for London and Network Rail, to list a few. Each session had a mentor or two representing their firm and offered help with our CVs, graduate scheme application tips, assessment centres and an overview of what employers really value in an application. "The mentors were really relatable, which I found very important. For example, my mentor was young and had her own story to tell, and was happy to share her own obstacles, experiences and struggles she also faced before landing her dream job." So what was the result? "Well, I have gained my confidence back and also gained knowledge into companies I will be looking into in the near future," Kebe says. "I have a network of people from wellrecognised professions who want to help me and my approach to applying for jobs has also definitely improved." The mentoring circle also opened some doors, and Kebe was invited to the House of Commons by Employment Minister Alok Sharma, discussing the decrease in the gap in employment of black and minority ethnic (BAME) people. Her verdict? "Mentoring works." London-wide mentoring circles will be available in every borough from April. Already, a total of 500 BAME young people have participated and a total of 85 employers have been involved, including Google, Nationwide, the BBC and Fujitsu. BROADEN YOUR HORIZONS "When I left school, I wanted to start making plans for what to do after university," says economics student Tom Burgess, who has also benefited from mentoring. "There are so many career paths open to someone with my degree — consulting, investment banking, audit and many more. It was important to choose the right one." Burgess, right, started visiting insight days held by different employers, which is where he found out about upReach, a charity which works with more than 30 top employers, as well as universities, to offer opportunities to broaden students' horizons, help them understand different career pathways and develop skills. "It was after attending a Spring Into Deloitte insight day that I decided I wanted to pursue a career in consulting," he says. "However, at that stage, I did not know how to go about securing a career at a top professional services firm." This is where mentoring helped. UpReach contributes to Deloitte's One Million Futures social impact initiative and connected him with a career mentor — Daniel Lister, a finance transformation manager at Deloitte — to help unlock his potential. "Daniel and I discussed my aspirations and about my opportunity areas for personal development," he says. "We put together a project plan to work on these skills areas through practical case studies, research tasks and presentations to develop the broad range of skills needed for consulting. "The mentoring programme played an important part in allowing me to secure a graduate role. My internship with Deloitte last summer gave me even greater insights into consulting, and I was delighted to receive an offer of a graduate role starting in September." Burgess adds: "I would definitely recommend finding a mentor. "Daniel and I started out by planning what we wanted to get out of the mentoring process and that really helped us to be productive. "Setting expectations is important to maximise the value of the time." Deloitte has already hired 54 graduates as a result of its partnership with upReach, one of the Deloitte's One Million Futures initiatives that aims to transform the lives of one million people over five years through education and employment opportunities. Volunteering as a mentor can involve just an hour a month, but even this can be transformative, particularly if you "click" with the other person. Lister says: "We both share a passion for consulting, have both studied economics at the University of Nottingham and are both keen musicians. "When I first read Tom's CV, it told me a clear story of someone who is a selfstarter, driven to find and create opportunities and make the most of each one. Tom is the driving force behind all his successes and has utilised everything he has learnt with great results." UpReach offers a free online test available to all students as a means to measure their employability using the upReach Graduate Employability Framework (GEF). Check your GEF at getemployable.org. BECOME A MENTOR Mentoring a young person is a great way to volunteer, boost your coaching skills and reflect on your own personal development. It can also help organisations to boost diversity, with Fujitsu, one of the employers involved in the London-wide Mentoring Circles programme, saying: "Not only is this the right thing to do, but also this is good business, as we want people from all backgrounds to influence the world we live and work in." Rupal Karia, head of UK&I public and private sector at Fujitsu, adds: "We want to create an environment where diversity and inclusion becomes self-evident IF YOU FEEL LIKE YOU NEED A DAY OFF, SIMPLY GIVE YOURSELF A BREAK IF YOU made it into work today, but did so with a streaming cold, hacking cough or a temperature, then you are not alone. Half of Londoners feel too guilty to take days off sick, even when they are genuinely ill, and it does not just affect their physical health, it is affecting their mental health, too. Although today is National Sickie Day, actually taking a sickie is actually an increasing rarity. The majority of Londoners (82.6 per cent) actually only take one or two sick days a year, according to new research from CVLibrary. The reason? Around half of us don't want to leave our team in the lurch, while one in four believe calling in sick reflects badly on them. This is counterproductive, as we rarely work at our best when ill, and turning up with a genuine illness can also put the rest of your team at risk. So-called "presenteeism" is also damaging to our health. With two-thirds of professionals in London confessing to working more than their contracted hours, many of us are stressed and exhausted, which can lead to even more sickness. And, to top this off, many of us are not taking the time off we deserve. New research has found that the average Londoner has 6.8 days of annual leave that they have not taken — more than the standard working week, according to a survey by Lee Hecht Harrison Penna, which says: "Companies give their staff holiday allowance for a reason — to take time away from the office to enjoy a break, relax and reboot for when they return to work. "It's important for workers to take all of their annual leave so they don't risk burning out from exhaustion." CAPTION: Burning out: Increased workload and stress can affect our immune system — but many of us refuse to take days off to rest; ;
