 The central government is betting on a risky strategy of relying on high-cost funds even as it keeps its fingers crossed that a benign credit environment will help it reduce debt after the next fiscal year. It hopes only a little over half of its loans would be spent on day to day expenses in 2021-22 compared to over 68% estimated in 2019-20. However, its expectation of lower revenue expenditure is based on the assumption that interest rates will remain low, which itself is based on the bet that prices will remain soft "because of lower pressures on the external front'', the Centre's medium term fiscal policy and strategy statement said.
Although government debt levels are not unmanageable, the high-risk strategy could itself fuel price rise as interest costs are rising and revenues are not keeping pace. About 34%, up from the earlier budgeted 33.4%, of its revenue receipts this year will be used up to pay interest on loans.
A little under a third of the fiscal deficit is now financed by expensive small savings held in the National Small Savings Fund (NSSF) and other collections such as public provident fund and state provident fund. The NSSF would fund 18.5% of the deficit in 2019-20, up from 12% in the previous year. Losses from the NSSF, which is largely interest outgo and management expenses, have been pegged at over Rs 1.10 lakh crore in 2018-19.
An economist who helps the government prepare the budget told ETthat the NSSF could become a trap for the government as its losses could widen and redemptions have to be met from new deposits because of asset liability mismatch. Small savings interest rates are set every quarter and broadly linked to government bond yields. The funds used to be lent to state governments earlier, but only four states now borrow from it. Most of the funds are used by the Centre to finance its deficit and also lent to entities such as the Food Corporation of India, National Highways Authority, Rural Electrification Corporation, Power Finance Corporation and Air India.
NR Bhanumurthy, professor at the National Institute of Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP), says the administered interest rates also put pressure on the Reserve Bank of India's monetary policy. They reduce the leeway the central bank has in fixing rates. Others, however, say it is immaterial as the RBI's mandate has changed. "It doesn't matter as the RBI's mandate is now only inflation targeting. Besides, small savings are only about 10%of bank deposits,'' says Madan Sabnavis, chief economist at CARE Ratings.
That may be true but in October last year the RBI and the government had a sort of face-off over the credit environment which eventually led to the exit of Governor Urijit Patel.
The government has announced a clutch of doles in Budget 2019-20, including an annual income support of Rs 6,000 for small landholders costing Rs 20,000 crore in the current fiscal and .`75,000 crore from the next onwards. That pump-priming could feed inflation and lead to hardening interest rates.
Bhanumurthy also cautions about the Extra Budgetary Resources (EBRs) of Rs 50,195 crore as on December 31, 2018, adding up to about 0.3% of the GDP. The fiscal policy statement says the repayment of these liabilities are done from the budget. The figure of the central government debt does not include this liability as the exact quantum would not be available until the end of the financial year.
