 US Embassy in Cairo Book Fair
It was 2005 when US Embassy in Cairo last participated in the Cairo International Book Fair. This makes its return to one of the most prestigious and celebrated cultural events in Egypt for that event’s golden jubilee an occasion to celebrate. Without explaining the 14-year absence Dorothy Shea, the Deputy Chief of the US Mission in Cairo, says “the important message is that we are back. And we are happy to be here again”.
The US Embassy booth at the fair showcases some of the most recent and the most significant titles of one of its oldest initiatives, The Cairo Arabic Book Program, which aims to publish a verity of American books in Arabic in cooperation with Egyptian publishing houses. “In this small booth we have some of the best selling books in the US together with some of my favourite books in my childhood in Arabic,” Shea explains. “We hope there is a little bit of something for everybody. It is very hard in one booth to have everything but hopefully it will peak everyone’s interest and then they start looking for some more books.”
To mark Black History Month, Shea highlights The Essential Writings and Speeches of Martin Luther King Jr, which is available in Arabic among other books about inspiring African-American role models: “Martin Luther King is so dear to Americans, and we are so proud of the legacy that he left behind. We love to share that with the Egyptian audience. I would say culture is one of the pillars of the strong and deep partnership between US and Egypt. The fact that we are here is a testament of the importance that we attach to culture as one of the really foundational elements of our relationship. Generally speaking, as good as we do we can do better, and as hard as we work we can work harder.”
According to John Ragheb, the Manager of the Cairo Arabic Book Program, thousands of books are translated under the umbrella of this programme in the fields of literature, politics, business, self-help and so on: “In collaboration with selected local publishing houses, we support the translation, obtain the copyrights, support and supervise the publishing of the books, then we buy 1,000 out of 3,000 copies of each book to be distributed locally to the libraries and academic institutions and regionally to other embassies in the Middle East”.
The Cairo International book fair is a unique opportunity to promote the programme to the Egyptian audience and offer the books at reasonable prices: “We have many books which are concerned with American culture, but there are also books that are more attractive to local readers such as those on business, literature, entrepreneurship, in addition to children’s books. We try to strike a balance between the interests of Egyptian readers and the need to representAmerican history and culture in one place”.
US Embassy Spokesperson Sam Werberg describes the programme as a unique initiative that serves the entire region: “Those publications are also showcased in the local market through their publishing houses, so they are not only distributed by the embassy but are available in the bookshops and in the other booths of the publishing housed in the book fair. It is still always good to have them all in one place like the US Embassy booth. Although we have only books this time, for future rounds of the book fair there will be a full programme of cultural activities.”
