 The dollar took a hit yesterday after the Reserve Bank conceded it may need to cut interest rates again if the economy slows more than expected amid “increased risks”.
The comments resulted in the dollar diving more than one US cent, hitting a two-week low of US71.33c in early European trading, despite the bank still expecting “reasonable” economic growth and saying the economy should be able to handle the ­“inevitable correction” in house prices.
The currency had jumped a day earlier after RBA governor Philip Lowe outlined slightly weaker economic forecasts — due to be detailed its Monetary Policy Statement tomorrow — which still seemed consistent with a so-called “tightening bias” despite growing market speculation of a rate cut this year.
The sharemarket hit a four-month high yesterday, with the S&P/ASX 200 rising 0.3 per cent to 6026.1 points.
In a wide-ranging speech to the National Press Club in Sydney yesterday, Dr Lowe said the outlook for interest rates was now “more evenly balanced” and growth could be weaker than ­expected.
“There are scenarios where the next move in the cash rate is up and other scenarios where it is down,” Dr Lowe said.
“In the event of a sustained increased in the unemployment rate and a lack of further progress towards the inflation objective, lower interest rates might be appropriate at some point,” he added, echoing a dovish shift by the US Federal Reserve after its own board meeting last week.
“We have the flexibility to do this if needed.” It was a major shift in interest rate guidance from the central bank, which has held its official cash rate at a record low 1.5 per cent since August 2016. In the minutes of its December board meeting it said “the next move in the cash rate was more likely to be an increase than a decrease”.
JPMorgan Australia chief economist Sally Auld said the RBA’s new flexibility on rates suggested the central bank felt “there is enough to worry about right now such that a narrative which affirms that the next move in rates is likely up is no longer appropriate”.
In her view, the RBA would only cut interest rates in the first half of 2019 if global growth slowed further or Australian data suggested weaker-than-expected growth in the December quarter and the prospect of more softness in the March quarter, but the prospect was “now a higher probability than it was”.
“There is nothing to be gained from an abrupt shift in bias if the bank believes that it won’t potentially need the flexibility on rates,” Ms Auld said.
However, while flagging a further fall in house prices, Dr Lowe said “what we are seeing looks to be a manageable adjustment” that was “not expected to derail economic growth”.
“Our economy should be able to handle this,” he said.
“Over the next year, we are expecting a pick-up in household disposable income (from employment and wages growth) to provide a counterweight to the wealth effects of lower housing prices.” He downplayed the risk of spillovers from house prices to consumption, noting that “most households do not change their consumption in response to short-term changes in their wealth”.
“During the recent upswing in housing prices, the strategy of borrowing against the extra equity in your home looked less sensible than it once was, especially as debt levels rose,” he said.
Construction activity was around its peak level and the large pipeline of approved projects was expected to support activity for a while, but developers were finding it more difficult to sell apartments off the plan, and lenders were less willing to provide finance, Dr Lowe said.
The RBA expected housing investment to fall 10 per cent over the next 2½ years. And there were “other possible outcomes” that could require interest rate cuts. “Continued low income growth, together with falling housing prices, would be an unwelcome combination and would make for a softer outlook for the economy,” Dr Lowe warned.
“Some Australian households have high levels of debt, so there is a degree of uncertainty about how they would respond to this combination.” Ivan Colhoun, NAB’s chief economist, markets, said low unemployment could support spending, while progress on returning inflation to target depended on a tighter labour market lifting wages growth.
“At the moment, while the unemployment rate remains low and is forecast to fall further, this seems a reasonable expectation,” Mr Colhoun said. “Any signs of softening in the lead indicators of the labour market however would likely derail the RBA’s outlook for this gradual progress.” Dr Lowe emphasised that the RBA did not see a strong case for a near-term change in the cash rate and was “able to maintain the current policy setting” while assessing “the shifts in the global economy and the strength of household spending”.China was his main concern as it was “walking a fine line between supporting the economy and addressing the debt problem” amid a slowdown worsened by its trade dispute with the US.
