 With elections looming, the political class seems to have its priorities sorted out: It's politics over economics and voter over the exchequer.
The Centre and states have been doling out sops -- from farm loan waivers and income support for agriculturalists to unemployment doles and even gold.
In BJP-ruled Assam, finance minister Himanta Biswa Sarma raised the bar on Wednesday by offering gold, estimated to cost ?38,000, for brides from families with annual income of less than ?5 lakh. He also promised "e-bikes" for all girls who secure first division in higher secondary examination and a one-time subsidy of ?50,000 on all education loans sanctioned during the current financial year.
These promises, coming at a time when the BJP government is having to contend with unrest in the state over the citizenship bill, dwarfed Sarma's offer of rice at ?1 per kg for the poor, something which has now become par for the course for state governments of different stripes.
On Thursday, Madhya Pradesh is expected to join the procession with a monthly unemployment allowance of ?4,000, going one step ahead of Rajasthan, which "honoured" its election promise last week, promising ?3,000- ?3,500 a month.
The Kamal Nath government in MP will also roll out a scheme guaranteeing 100 days of work for urban youth -- a promise the CM made on Republic Day and reiterated in an interview to TOI only a week ago. Sources said the Congress regime will also double social security pension for the elderly from ?300 to ?600. All three decisions were cleared by the chief minister and the finance department on Tuesday.
When it's poll season, taxes are something that no finance minister -- either at the Centre or in states -- wants to raise. Last Friday, the Centre offered 100% tax rebate for those earning up to ?5 lakh while offering concessions also to senior citizens and the middle class.
On Wednesday, Left-ruled Kerala deferred its plan to levy a "flood cess" on GST. It had argued for the cess on the ground that the money thus mopped up would be used for repairing the damage caused by the calamity. There is no clarity whether the state would go ahead with its budget proposal until the Lok Sabha elections are over.
The pre-poll gifts come ahead of the general elections, which are expected to be keenly contested, prompting politicians to woo voters with freebies that economists have frowned upon on the ground that they could adversely impact the already-strained exchequer.
Questions are being raised on the impact that the annual farm income support of ?6,000 will have on the Centre's fiscal deficit that is projected to be higher next year. The Narendra Modi government's pension scheme for the unorganized sector, which is targeting 10 crore beneficiaries over 3-4 years, has an initial allocation of ?500 crore but will cost much more when it is rolled out.
Several states have already announced relief packages and waivers for farmers, with the promises on last count adding up to around ?2.3 lakh crore. The so-called farm distress has promoted politicians to rush to their rescue with states such as Telangana, Odisha and Jharkhand offering income support. The recent electoral success of TRS in Telangana has only strengthened the belief that income support for farmers can be vote-spinners. Telangana's Rythu Bandhu and Odisha's Kalia schemes are expected to cost over ?22,000 crore annually.
Congress owes its success in Chhattisgarh and, to a lesser extent, in MP to its promise of farm loan waivers.
