 FRAUGHT political tensions around the world should not tip a modest economic slowdown into a full-blown recession, top economists have warned, calling for calm to prevail in markets.
Despite the risks posed by parliamentary chaos in the UK, the US-China trade war and a slump in the eurozone, analysts at UBS and the National Institute for Economic and Social Research (Niesr) believe underlying economic conditions remain stable.
"The average person does not care where the FTSE is or where the S&P is," said Paul Donovan, chief economist at UBS Global Wealth Management. "What people care about is: 'Do I have a job, can I afford to buy what I want to buy?'" With global unemployment at a 40-year low and inflation steady, he believes this means consumer spending should remain solid.
"I don't think noise around the markets or politics is going to make much of a difference to that," said Mr Donovan. "People will continue at this pace of consumer spending."
He added that the perception of poor growth and wobbles in financial markets should not distract from the underlying stability. "The global economy is doing just fine. The world has slowed down from the above-trend growth of last year, but that was only to be expected."
Jagjit Chadha, director of Niesr, also believes the risks to the economy have become overblown. "People are imagining the world is heading for some kind of disaster. There are risks… but we can sometimes overplay the risks that are out there. We don't have to take the view that those risks will manifest themselves."
The professor pointed to the UK as a prime example where political disputes seem intense, yet "the economy continues to do reasonably well".
However, he did note that problems such as weak productivity growth have not been addressed, in part because political turmoil has taken up much of the nation's efforts.
Niesr has, however, trimmed its global growth forecasts, anticipating GDP will rise by 3.6pc in 2019 and 3.5pc in 2020, slowing from 3.7pc in 2017 and 3.8pc last year. The eurozone is one of the more troubled areas as Italy has fallen into recession, but even here Niesr predicts growth of 1.5pc this year across the currency area as a whole.
Fears that excessive interest rate hikes in the US could cause a recession may also have been allayed by the Federal Reserve's decision to pause monetary tightening. UBS also anticipates world GDP will rise by 3.6pc this year.
3.6pc The amount by which UBS and Niesr anticipate the world's GDP to rise in 2019, a touch lower than the 3.8pc last year
