 Germany almost certainly slid into outright recession at the end of last year as evidence mounts of a deepening economic malaise across much of the eurozone.
A shock fall in German industrial output in December has dashed hopes for a quick rebound after the country's "carmageddon" woes in late 2018. It points to more pervasive troubles in Europe’s powerhouse economy.
The Dax in Frankfurt ended 2.6pc lower on Thursday, with Deutsche Bank plunging 6pc and Daimler and the steel group ThyssenKrupp both down 5pc.
A flight to safety drove down yields on 10-year German government bonds to a two-year low of 0.11pc. German debt is trading at negative yields on maturities as far out as nine years in a warning sign of future deflation.
The German data office originally thought the country had squeaked by with a flicker of growth in the fourth quarter, but City analysts say it will be forced to revise its figures after a blizzard of dire figures. German GDP contracted 0.8pc in the third quarter.
Citigroup has predicted a technical recession. It fears that the headline effects could cause confidence to buckle, muddying the political waters as insurgent parties of Left and Right seek a breakthrough in the European elections in May. The darkening picture is already prompting calls for counter-cyclical measures as an insurance policy.
The 3.2pc fall in German industrial production in the second half of 2018 was the sharpest contraction since the Lehman crisis. There is little sign of the stabilisation yet. Manufacturing orders fell 7pc last month from a year earlier.
The industrial recession has spread from the car companies - struggling with changes in emissions standards - to construction, chemicals, and the pharmaceutical sectors. It is becoming harder to keep arguing that drought and low water levels on the Rhine are a decisive cause.
Per capita income growth in Italy is a disaster - Real GDP
The continuing downturn in China, East Asia and Turkey is taking its toll, but it is also possible that Brexit is doing some damage below the waterline to the German economy. The country accounts for half of the EU’s £92bn surplus in goods trade with UK. This has been eroded by the weak pound.
Marcel Fratzscher, head of the DIW economic institute, said fears of a deep downturn were overblown. “We must stop this alarmism. The ever louder laments about the German economy have gone too far. It is humming along fine,” he told Der Spiegel.
The more immediate danger is Italy. The European Commission slashed its growth outlook for the country to 0.2pc in 2019 on Thursday, down from 1.2pc in November. This has grim implications for the country’s budget deficit and debt trajectory.
The eurozone will grow by 1.3pc this year. That has been cut from implausible predictions of 1.9pc issued in the Autumn outlook, which was greeted with incredulity at the time by private economists. By then it was already clear the money supply had slowed abruptly.
“Worries about the 'sovereign-bank loop' and debt sustainability are resurfacing in some euro area countries. The possibility of a disruptive Brexit creates additional uncertainty,” said Valdis Dombrovskis, the euro commissioner.
The sharp revision of Italy’s figures pushes up the implied budget deficit to well over 2.5pc of GDP. It overwhelms the effect of spending cuts agreed by the governing Lega/Five Star coalition after an angry showdown with Brussels last year.
“The commission forecast is still too high - I think growth will be minus 0.2pc,” said Lorenzo Codogno, former chief economist of the Italian treasury and now at LC Macro Advisors.
160,000 people are leaving Italy each year, mostly the young - Emigration
The risk spread on Italian 10-year bonds jumped 13 basis points to 286 on Thursday, but is still within the trading range seen since May. Global fixed income funds view the enticing return on Italian debt as a worthwhile risk at a time when more than $9 trillion of bonds worldwide are trading at negative yields, the highest since early 2017.
Yet the global deflationary force that lies behind this is double-edged for Italy, as they lower the nominal GDP growth and play havoc with the country’s fragile debt dynamics.
The International Monetary Fund warned this week in its Article IV health check that Italy risks a fresh debt crisis that could “push global markets into uncharted territory”. The trigger could be a downgrade to junk status by the rating agencies. The country has to finance or roll over [Euro]400bn of debt in 2019. That is twice the entire GDP of Greece.
The IMF said banks may have trouble accessing the wholesale capital markets, forcing them to deleverage and therefore to starve the economy of credit. One Italian lender had to pay 13pc to raise money in December.
Banks are being hit through "doom loop" linkages to Italian sovereign debt. Each 100 point rise in Italy’s spreads erodes their core capital ratios by 40 points. All these effects aggravate the vicious circle.
The Fund rebuked the Lega-Five Star alliance for rolling back reforms and resorting to unaffordable budget stimulus to boost demand rather than grappling with the country’s underlying pathologies. It warned that ill-judged policies "could leave Italy vulnerable to a renewed loss of market confidence, even in the absence of further shocks."
In an astonishing detail, the report said productivity levels in Italy’s non-tradable sector had fallen by 16pc since 1996. It is as if the country is slipping back into an economic dark age.
Per capita income has dropped by 4pc over the last two decades. Almost 160,000 people are leaving the country each year, mostly the young fleeing the blighted Mezzogiorno in the South. The workforce is contracting at a frightening pace.
Italy's productivity has been falling for 20 years
This makes it even harder to restore the debt trajectory back to a sustainable path. Some economists say the only way to break out of this perennial trap is for Italy to leave the euro, devalue by 30pc, and restructure its debts in an epic jubilee. This would be a traumatic event for the whole world.
The odd exception to the European Commission’s unrelenting gloom is a slight upgrade in UK growth to 1.3pc this year, assuming there is a Brexit deal. This is the same as France and Belgium, and better than Germany at 1.1pc.
A disorderly EU withdrawal would lead to a far worse outcome for Britain and for EU countries linked closely through trade flows, supply chains, and above all through financial channels.
The open question is whether Europe will resort to counter-cyclical fiscal stimulus to stop the downturn becoming entrenched. There is little that the European Central Bank can do on the monetary front with interest rates already at minus 0.4pc. It has just shut down its bond purchase programme and there is no appetite to start it again short of an emergency.
Christian Schulz from Citigroup said the German finance ministry was looking at tax cuts worth 0.1pc to 0.5pc of GDP, but not until July. There are plans for a burst of much-needed public investment.
The mixed messages from Berlin are hard to decipher. Finance minister Olaf Scholz is at the same time pushing for [Euro]25bn of pro-cyclical cuts to balance the budget. Legal debt brakes at every level of the German government encourage paralysis.
Perhaps the German right hand and the left hand will balance each other out. Europe will not see any meaningful stimulus from the one big country in a strong enough fiscal position to act.
The net result is that the eurozone faces the non-negligible risk of its third recession in a decade and nothing much is being done to stop it.
