 The Reserve Bank will slice predictions for the national economy and inflation today as signs grow that consumers are increasingly worried about holding down a job and the cost of living.
Amid fresh forecasts of falls for Melbourne and Sydney house prices, the central bank will release its quarterly monetary policy statement, which will contain downgrades to economic growth and underlying inflation.
Reserve governor Philip Lowe this week revealed the statement will reduce expected growth for this year and next by a quarter percentage point, while the RBA now believes it will take longer for inflation to return to its target band of 2 per cent to 3 per cent.
It will be a major turnaround for the bank, which in its last statement said there were signs growth was accelerating. Instead, the economy expanded by a weak 0.3 per cent in the September quarter.
The softer economy on top of an acceleration in the fall in house prices - plus its impact on household consumption - has forced the Reserve to wind back expectations of an interest rate increase, with Dr Lowe saying a cut is now equally as likely as a lift in borrowing costs.
The Reserve remains upbeat about the labour market, with the national jobless rate at 5 per cent.
But the NAB's quarterly survey of consumer behaviour shows workers are not nearly as confident as the Reserve Bank on job prospects.
Overall consumer anxiety hit its highest level in three years in the December quarter, on the back of a surge in worries about job security.
Cost of living remains the main concern for most consumers, with utility bills the single-biggest problem. Almost four in 10 of those surveyed had experienced financial hardship in the past quarter, the highest level in two years. Consumers also reported reducing their expenditure on non-essential goods, with many saying they had cut spending on major household appliances, eating out, personal goods such as clothes and also on medical expenses.
NAB chief economist Alan Oster noted a widespread lift in consumer anxiety over the past few months.
"Anxiety increased most over the cost of living and, despite a healthy labour market, concerns over job security also climbed to its highest level since mid-2016," he said.
The Reserve is monitoring the property market, looking for signs the fall in house values over recent months has resulted in consumers winding back spending intentions.
The Commonwealth Bank, in forecasts released yesterday, said it believes median house prices could slip another 5 per cent in Sydney this year and 6 per cent in Melbourne. That would be on top of an 8.9 per cent fall in Sydney and 7 per cent in Melbourne last year.
Such a drop in Sydney would take its fall from the peak reached in late 2017 to 15 per cent; in Melbourne the drop would be 13 per cent.
The rest of the nation's capitals are expected to do a little better, although both Darwin (26.5 per cent) and Perth (19 per cent) will have suffered major declines since their peaks in mid-2014.
Commonwealth senior economist Gareth Aird said the decline in prices would largely be driven by a sharper fall in credit growth than had been expected and a drop in sentiment towards the property market in general.
"Sentiment is hard to forecast but has a big impact on prices because the relationship becomes self-fulfilling," he said. "That is, if households expect prices to weaken, then demand for credit falls and prices will continue to correct lower."
Comment Page 20
