 The odds of an interest rate cut on Melbourne Cup Day are firming after the Reserve Bank suddenly shifted to a neutral monetary policy outlook this week, sending the dollar sharply lower.
Traders are expecting a quarter per cent cut in the official cash rate by next February and the market-implied chance of cut by November rose to 56 per cent, from 34 per cent two days ago.
The dollar slipped below US71c last night after falling almost US1.5c since RBA governor Philip Lowe surprised investors on Wednesday by completely abandoning his previous guidance that “the next move in interest rates is more likely to be an increase than a decrease”.
But shares reacted positively, with the S&P/ASX 200 hitting a fresh four-month high of 6105.9.
While most economists expect interest rates to remain on hold, a growing minority feel the RBA will be forced to cut by the end of the year as a slowdown in the global economy combines with weak domestic demand and a sharp fall in house prices, exacerbated by a credit squeeze.
UBS economist George Tharenou was the latest to join the rate-cutting camp, predicting the RBA would lower its cash rate by 25 basis points after its November board meeting — which falls on Melbourne Cup Day — and cut again to a record low of 1 per cent in the first half of 2020.
“We are now officially changing our base case to the RBA cutting,” Mr Tharenou said.
The RBA has held its cash rate steady at a record low of 1.5 per cent since August 2016.
“Given UBS sees economic growth slowing to a below ‘trend’ pace of 2.3 per cent year on year in 2019, and hence a likelihood of a softening — rather than tightening — of the labour market over the next year, and hence little inflation pressure, we now look for a 25-basis-point cut in November, and an additional 25-basis-point cut in the first half of 2020,” Mr Tharenou said.
He said the outlook for rates would depend on how much the jobs market softened in response to slower domestic and global growth and what this meant for inflation and wages.