 Trump isn’t the first president to lean on the bank
US Federal Reserve chairman Jerome Powell was probably relieved he wasn’t singled out in President Donald Trump’s State of the Union address this week.
Trump’s criticism of the Fed has died down in recent months, no doubt because Powell, after repeatedly signalling a determination to lift policy rates, had updated the Fed’s guidance to “patience” and “data dependence”.
Trump’s public dressings-down of Federal Reserve chairmen Janet Yellen and more recently Powell have drawn disapproval. But central bankers in the US have long come under intense pressure from presidents to juice up the economy. Trump’s behaviour is quite tame by comparison.
President Harry Truman slammed Fed chairman Thomas B. McCabe in the early 1950s. “If the Federal Reserve board is going to pull the rug from under the Treasury we certainly are faced with a most serious situation … that is exactly what Mr Stalin wants,” Truman wrote, furious that the interest rates on US government bonds were a testing 2.5 per cent. Trump is yet to accuse Powell of secretly conducting monetary policy to help Xi Jinping or Vladimir Putin.
As Trump has found with Powell, whom he hand-picked, removing a chairman and picking someone else doesn’t mean compliance. Truman ultimately forced McCabe to resign and installed Treasury official William McChesney Martin, who went on to run the Fed from 1951 to 1970, even longer than Alan Greenspan would years later. Martin refused to play ball, too, putting inflation reduction ahead of the US government’s demands for cheap fin­ance. Years later, Truman would call Martin a traitor on the street in New York.
The world’s monetary system started breaking down in the late 1960s, when the cost of the Vietnam War and Lyndon Johnson’s Great Society social programs put immense pressure on the US government’s budget and inflation started to rise.
Johnson wanted interest rates to stay low. In 1964 “when the Fed made a show of resistance, Johnson summoned Martin to his Texas ranch, and physically shoved him around his living room, yelling in his face, ‘boys are dying in Vietnam and Bill Martin doesn’t care’,” writes Sebastian Mallaby in his brilliant history of the Fed and Alan Greenspan, The Man Who Knew.
If Trump’s dinner with Powell at the White House a few days ago was as rough, it would be known. His administration leaks notoriously.