 Oyibo H. Mbaukwu
The attention of the whole world has shifted to Nigeria for a good reason. Next week, millions of eligible Nigerian voters will go to the polls to vote for their preferred candidates for the presidential and national assembly polls. There is palpable fear in the land, people are jittery, and the atmosphere is filled with expectations. As Nigerians prepare for the elections, the presidential election seems to attract all the attention. This is for obvious reasons because Nigerians appear to be more interested in what happens at the centre. It is understandable again because what ails Nigeria stems from the centre.
No time in the history of this country has various groups endorsed a particular presidential candidate in the way groups within Nigeria and outside have endorsed the Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) presidential candidate, Alhaji Atiku Abubakar.
No time also in the history of this country have Nigerians been so politically aware than in the current era. There is a change from a feeling of indifference in the past to that of participation and commitment. Nigerians are making their positions known in certain, categorical terms.
Towards the 2019 general elections in Nigeria, results of researches carried out shows that Nigerians in different capacities endorse Atiku Abubakar, the presidential candidate of the PDP as the best option for them. His disposition as a man established in world economics, business success and financial literacy clearly sets him apart. In comparison to his major contender, Atiku stands tall as a man who is ready to return Nigeria to its great level again. This much is admitted by the renowned Economic Intelligence Unit (EIU), the research unit of the London based magazine, The Economist, when it predicted that Atiku Abubakar will win the next presidential elections in Nigeria.
According to The Economist “With the vote likely to be split in the North, Abubakar will find it easier to garner support from the country’s South, which has traditionally been a safe haven for the PDP. This gives Abubakar an edge, as does popular frustration over the rise in joblessness and poverty (two of the biggest voter concerns) on Mr. Buhari’s watch, as well as growing insecurity in central Nigeria.” There is no organization in a better position to give an overview of an election outcome in any country than The Economist of London. In the recent past, the analyses of the reputable magazine have come to be associated with authoritative lineaments. Therefore, when the magazine speaks, the world listens and pays serious attention.