 THE European Union has been warned "any" type of hard Brexit could threaten the stability of the eurozone and result in a weakened common currency.
Investment expert Sandra Crowl warned the European Union that "any negative Brexit" could potentially weaken the euro. The eurozone has already begun to show signs of increased fragility, with Italy announcing last week the beginning of a recession and Germany's Deutsche Bank warning the country is tethering towards economic decline. The weakness in the common currency against the pound could however continue should Brussels fail to strike a divorce deal with Britain before Brexit day on March 29.
Related articles MP delivers BRILLIANT reason why 'will of Brits' MUST be respected EU launches ANOTHER scathing attack on Theresa May's 'INSANE' plan
Speaking to Bloomberg, Ms Crowl said: "It’s a little bit hard to be short but that’s not without saying we can still see some pound weakness as we got into these negotiations, particularly against the US dollar.
"Not so much really against the euro because any negative result out of Brexit - hard or no deal - will obviously affect the euro as well. We will see that flow through into a weaker euro."
Despite signs of the pound surging after the latest meeting between Theresa May and Brussels eurocrats, the member of the Carmignac Gestion investment committee however warned selling sterling remains "risky" amid continued uncertainty about the future UK-EU relations.
She continued: "We are not short of a recession, the is clear, but we still have some growth in the UK.
READ MORE: Pound LIVE: GBP Sterling SURGES against euro as Germany falls into ‘RECESSION’
Brexit news: Brussels has been warned "any hard Brexit" could harm the euro
"We clearly have still some strong businesses, they're just on hold at the moment. To be hedging your sterling assets today, to be selling pounds it’s probably fought with a little bit of risk here because we are so close to potential decisions."
The pound has been struggling amid the ongoing possibility of a no-deal Brexit. This would mean come March 29, when the UK will leave the EU, it would do so with no regulations and guidelines going forward.
Laura Parsons, currency analyst at TorFX, spoke to Express.co.uk about the prospective change in fortune.
She said: “The minutes from the Bank of England’s latest policy meeting might have been cautious but the GBP/EUR exchange rate was still able to gain on Thursday.
"The pairing pushed its way to [Euro]1.144 during the local session as negatively revised European Commission growth forecasts weighed on the euro.”
Related articles Italy crisis: Industrial production falls AGAIN - fears over recession German finance minister ADMITS budget pressures - recession fears grow
The pound has been helped by the euro slumping to a two-week low as traders nursed losses in a week of gloomy data indicating an economic slowdown in Europe was spreading quickly.
The European Commission made sharp cuts to its growth and inflation forecasts on Thursday, sparking fears over the strength of the eurozone.
But the increasing struggles in Germany - the bloc’s largest economy valued at £3.1trillion - is driving fears over the future of the eurozone, with claims Germany slid into outright recession at the end of last year.
On Thursday, the country’s Federal Statistics Office revealed a surprise fall in German industrial output for December - the fourth consecutive month of decline.
Output was down 0.4 percent on November - in huge contrast to a forecast from Reuters for an increase of 0.7 percent.
