In January, Sydney listings were down 19 per cent and Melbourne down 11 per cent. The first month of the year is always slow for property though (largely due to holidays), and Mr Wilson said he expected this to pick up over February. Nonetheless, REA does not expect broader market conditions will improve in the short term.
The listings slump will undoubtedly also be felt by Domain, which is heavily reliant on the Melbourne and Sydney markets. Its majority shareholder Nine is the owner of The Sydney Morning Herald and The Age.
The cooling property market might slow both real estate portals' revenues, even though during News Corp's earnings call chief executive Robert Thomson said the decline in the housing market was "in some respect welcome because it means the rapid increase in property prices, which many analysts thought were unsustainable, have indeed come to an end".
AMP Capital chief economist Shane Oliver said the downturn had "a way to go yet". He expects the impact of listings on the property portals to rise as advertising budgets are cut back.
Despite this, he said there were some positive signs, with the Reserve Bank of Australia putting potential future cuts in interest rates on the table this week.
"RBA rate cuts, improved affordability and maybe a new federal first home buyer grant scheme may help set a base - but that is unlikely until next year some time," he said.
A research note from Citi said the soft outlook for listings was a "key negative" in the short-term, but prospects could brighten once elections are over and revenue growth trends improve in the 2020 financial year.
Compass Economists chief economist Hans Kunnen said a slower rate of population growth, difficult credit accessibility for marginal borrowers and an earlier ramping up in home building had resulted in a market correction that was "not going to assist [REA and Domain's] outlook" in the near-term.
"Modest economic growth, combined with reduced rate of supply of housing suggests to me that the decline in house prices will continue but not become a rout and should not drag the economy into serious recession," he said.