 Theresa May has lost her way but fears of devastating US-China fallout may be overblown Trade policy has been a news­worthy subject for commentators at large in Europe, North America and Asia since Donald Trump’s election and the Brexit referendum in Britain. It remains so. The general consequence is the constant question: Is the global trading system under threat?
Trump’s clumsy plans to turn US policy on its head and Theresa May’s inability to turn British policy in any direction to implement Brexit offer journalists and analysts plenty of scope for comment.
Australia has chosen its own peculiar bent. Under Julie Bishop as foreign minister, the priorities on the foreign affairs side of the ­Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade broadly focused on political military (pol-mil) affairs. Given concern about political relations with China and tensions in the South China Sea, senior Chinese officials refused to meet Australian ministers for about a year.
On the trade side, the relationship appears to be more business as usual. China is Australia’s biggest trading partner, taking 60 per cent of our exports.
Trump brought an eccentric trade policy to his presidency. The only acceptable trade agreements had to deliver a balanced trade ledger surplus to the US. He scotched US engagement in the Trans-Pacific Partnership free trade agreement that had been largely driven by the Obama administration. He initially ­opposed renewal of the North American Free Trade Agreement. And he raised tariffs on steel imports to promote jobs in the US steel industry — to the detriment of much larger steel-consuming industries.
Economists at large were ­initially perturbed by these deviations from traditional free-market trade policy. Two years on, Trump’s trade policy is becoming more moderate. The major issue now is trade with China.
The particular dismay for Australia and other Asia-Pacific trading economies was the sidelining by the President of the TPP. ­Regardless, the remaining 11 Asia-Pacific economies, led by Japan and Australia, reshaped the agreement as the Comprehensive and Progressive TPP. The agreement is in effect for seven of the participating countries. There’s an open invitation for the US to rejoin, but this remains off the agenda for Trump’s current term of office.