 TONY Blair “propelled Britain out of the European Union” with his failure to create a regulated immigration system after the bloc extended freedom of movement rights to new member states, Brexiteer Patrick Minford claimed.
Patrick Minford suggested former Prime Minister Tony Blair contributed to the Brexit vote with his decision not to fall in line with other EU member states and regulate migration from new bloc members. During Mr Blair’s tenure, the European Union extended freedom of movement rights to 10 new member states in what is to date the largest single extension of the union. The Brexiteer economist argued the British Prime Minister failed to create an appropriate migration policy in a deliberate bid to lure EU newcomers into the Labour Party.
Related articles Tony Blair claims Leavers are 'like armchair football bosses' Nigel Farage ridicules Blair in HISTORIC European Parliament debate
Speaking at an Economist for Free Trade event, Prof Minford said: “The Blair Government let in all people from Eastern Europe straight away and this was a terrible mistake.
“It certainly was a contributing factor to the Brexit debate. There’s not much more to be said other than Blair should not have done this and he was crazy to do it. He had an agenda.”
When the EU expanded in 2004, the British Government opted to institute welfare restriction while other countries such as Germany required workers relocating to the country to obtain a work permit.
France only allowed certain groups, including students and researchers, to enter the country freely while workers faced five years of restrictions.
READ MORE: We MUST control immigration and its costs both economic and social
Brexit news: Mr Minford suggested Tony Blair partially caused Brexit
Prof Minford continued: “The reason he did it was he thought they would all be Labour voters and so he thought, politically, it was a smart thing to do.
“Get a lot of new immigrants into the UK, all of whom would change the demographics of the vote. This was an irresponsible and foolish thing to do. Of course, what it did is propel us out of the EU."
Speaking in 2004 about Britain's immigration policy, Mr Blair said: "No country will be able to turn back residents of Poland or Lithuania or any other accession country at their border. In this we are no different from any of our European neighbours."
Express.co.uk has contacted the Tony Blair Institute for Global Change for a comment.
Home Secretary Sajid Javid in December presented the Government’s latest immigration policy, which he called the biggest shake-up of immigration policy for 40 years.
Under the blueprint, there will be a new visa route for skilled workers and no cap on high-skilled professions such as doctors and engineers.
Related articles Brexit referendum 'ONLY SOLUTION' to May's EU crisis - Blair demand Brexit FURY: Blair calls for business to 'EDUCATE' Brexiteers
Mr Javid said: "We are delivering on the clear instruction to get control over our borders and will bring in a new system that works in the interest of the British people.
"It will be a single, skills-based immigration system built around the talent and expertise people can bring, rather than where they come from - maximising the benefits of immigration and demonstrating the UK is open for business."
The Home Office has said the UK will have full control over who comes to the UK, with everyone needing permission before they arrive reducing net migration to “sustainable levels”.
The Government has however outlined plans to grant EU citizens the right to visit the country for three months without a visa. After three months, EU nationals will be required to apply for a new immigration status valid for three years.
A salary threshold, currently £30,000, would have to be met before workers could come to Britain.
The rights of EU citizens who lived in the UK before Brexit are protected by the EU Settlement Scheme.
