 In the wake of the Hayne report on financial misconduct, many are asking whether the banks have really learnt their lesson, whether their culture will change and how long it will take. Sorry, that's just the smaller half of the problem.
You can't answer those questions until you know whether the politicians and their economic advisers have learnt their lesson and whether their culture will change. Why? Because the game won't change unless the banks believe it has changed, and that will depend on whether governments (of both colours) and their regulators keep saying and doing things that remind the banks and others on the financial-sector gravy train that the behaviour of the past will no longer go undetected and unpunished.
One of Commissioner Hayne's most significant findings was that almost all the misbehaviour he uncovered was already illegal. Which raises an obvious query: in that case, why did so much of it happen?
Hayne's answer was "greed". That's true enough, but doesn't tell us much. Greed has been part of the human condition since before we descended from the trees. But greed has been channelled and held in check by other factors - particularly by social norms that disapprove of it and find ways to censure people who aggrandise themselves are the expense of others. In old times, social ostracism was enough.
So, since banks and other financial outfits haven't always been willing to exploit customers the way they have in recent decades, the question is: what changed? One explanation is the economy's become a bigger, more complex, more impersonal place, where the exploiter and the exploited don't know each other. Where the exploitation is carried out by four of the biggest, most sprawling and intricate computer systems in the country. Where I can spend my obscenely large pay cheque without seeing the faces of the people I've ripped off flashing before my eyes. Indeed, in my suburb, all of us get huge pay cheques. And I don't feel guilty; some of them get much bigger cheques than me.
But another part of the explanation must surely be that things started changing after the triumph of "economic rationalism", the introduction of micro-economic reform, and the deregulation of the financial sector in the second half of the 1980s. In the highly regulated world, there was less scope and less incentive to mistreat customers. Competition was limited and there was little innovation. Deregulation was intended to spur competition between the banks and give customers a better deal.
I'm not saying bank deregulation was a bad idea. It did bring innovation (we forget that banking and bill-paying are infinitely more convenient than they were) and you no longer have to live in a good suburb to get a loan from a bank. And the banks do compete far more fiercely than they used to. It's just that they compete not on price (as the reformers assumed they would) but on market share and which of the big four achieves the biggest profit increase. In this they've behaved just as you'd expect oligopolists to behave.
In the meantime, economic rationalism sanctified greed (the "invisible hand" tells us the market leaves us better off because of the greed of the butcher and the baker) and economists invented euphemisms such as "self-interest" and "the profit motive".
Then, after economists got the bright idea of using bonuses and share options to align management's interests with shareholders', big business elevated "shareholder value" to being companies' sole statutory obligation.
Now, however, when Hayne says the banks gave priority to sales and profits over their customers' interests, everyone's rolling around in horror. And politicians and econocrats are feigning surprise that financial regulators, long given a nod and wink to dispense only "light" regulation of the players (and denied the funding to give them any hope of successful prosecutions), did just as they were told.
Unless the econocrats and their political masters are willing to accept the naivety that marred bank deregulation, the harm ultimately done to bank customers - ranging from petty theft to life-changing loss - and the system's susceptibility to political corruption, the banks' culture won't change because the will to change it won't last.
The existing prohibitions on mistreatment of customers need to be made more effective, as proposed by Hayne but, above all, the law needs to be policed with vigour - including adequately resourced court proceedings - so banks realise they have no choice but to change.
 
