 India, Feb. 12 -- Dr Raman Kumar Agrawalla, Senior Consultant, Tata Consultancy Services,currently serving in its Analytics and Insights Unit, is a PhD in Economics and Management Studies. He has more than a quarter of a century of academic and industry experience. He started his career as a faculty in the famous Shri Ram College of Commerce in 1995 after a small stint at the Satyawati Coed College, Delhi University. He has delivered invited lectures and keynote addresses at many reputed business schools, universities and national and international forums including in cities like Berlin, Rome, Greece, Colombo, Florida and Alabama. He has published many scientific papers in international journals. He has some award winning research papers to his credit. He is a life member of All India Management Association, Indian Science Congress Association and Indian Econometrics Society. He is well-known as a senior economist, a poet and a storywriter and a systems thinker. He was the editor of Vani Vikas, a literary journal of Utkal University. He is named as a "Leading Scientist of the World 2013" by International Biographical Centre, Cambridge. In an interview to The Pioneer, he spoke to Sugyan Choudhury at Bhubaneswar on many economic issues including the scenario on the aftermath of the Union and State Budgets 2019.
Are the Interim Budgets recently passed in Parliament and Odisha Assembly pragmatic and strategically equipped to boost our economy?
Talking of the budget of the Modi Government, I would say that there have been credible efforts to increase disposable income for small and marginal farmers, lower and middle income classes and workers in the unorganised sector hitherto the neglected sections of our society. Income transfer to farmers, particularly through Direct Benefits Transfer (DBT) to the bank accounts of the beneficiaries through online bank transfer, is a welcome step to ameliorate the immediate agrarian distress. However, it is not enough though it reflects a good start. Being fiscally prudent while budgeting for the economy is one of the greatest requirements of being pragmatic. In this front, the Finance Minister has done a worthy job. The budget has fixed the fiscal deficit at 3.4% of GDP for 2019-20, same as the revised estimates of 2018-19. The fiscal math in the budget expects gross tax revenue to increase by 13.5%, direct tax revenue to increase by 15% and indirect taxes to increase by 11.8%. This, with an optimistic nominal GDP growth of 11.5%, keeps the tax buoyancy above 1%, indicating tax revenues to increase more than proportionately in response to a rise in national income. To sum up, the Centre has a fiscal consolidation roadmap; and as per it, the aim is to bring the fiscal deficit down to 3% in 2020-21. It is likely to remain unachieved now given the uncertainties involved in the revenue projections in the budget. Thus, as an economist, one can see dilution in the commitment towards fiscal consolidation. However, this makes sense and reflects pragmatism given the desirable need for direct income transfers of Rs 6,000 a year to marginal farmers having cultivable land up to two hectares (Rs 75,000 crore per year allocated for it) to contain immediate farmers distress countrywide.
What's about the Interim Budget passed in the Odisha Legislative Assembly?
In our Odisha also, farmers and agriculture are at the centre-stage in the Interim Budget or Vote-on-Account for 2019-20. Rs 19,557 crore has been allocated to the agriculture sector in the State Budget of Rs 1.32 lakh crore. A whopping Rs 4,461 crore is allocated to 'Krushak Assistance for Livelihood and Income Augmentation' (KALIA), a scheme for farmers announced earlier with much fanfare that gives an annual assistance of Rs 10,000 to small, marginal and tenant farmers. The budget also allocates Rs 800 crore towards subsidy on interest on farm loans, Rs 1,777 crore for lift irrigation projects, Rs 260 crore for seeds and fertilisers and Rs 295 crore for farm mechanisation. Interestingly, the State economy has been an economy of dole-outs over the years. In this budget, the Government has given Rs 1,028 crore to its Rs 1-per-kg rice scheme, Rs 864 crore to Biju Swasthya Kalyan Yojana, Rs 301 crore to Mission Shakti to help women's self-help groups and Rs 400 crore to its so-called people-connect scheme PEETHA (People's Empowerment-Enabling Transparency and Accountability of Odisha Initiatives). However, I strongly believe that we need to move from an economy of dole-outs to an economy of designed interventions and decisive steps to improve the quality of life and standard of living of all the people.
Can you please elaborate on the point of moving our economy from doles to designed interventions?
The Governments, however, simultaneously require more sound strategic measures and not only fancy, alluring schemes or surgical strikes. No doubt, the direct income transfers for the needy are better than doles and much better than loan waiver of any kind. I think it is time to do away with the loan waivers as a policy instrument. This could be done for all and sundry, including the borrowers in agriculture or industry. Doles and loan waivers or prospects of these breed moral hazard problems and debilitate the genuine enterprising people and weaken the system and the economy. As part of designed intervention, the Governments should work towards building a robust social security programme, deftly and aptly designed, and means and mechanisms are to be put in place for its efficient and effective execution. For instance, I suggest a full-scale long-term agrarian strategy with the following elements, among others -- Small and marginal farmers, tenant farmers and landless labourers, needy senior citizens should be given adequate benefits of direct income transfers. A system should be devised and implemented to identify and create a database of such beneficiaries as early as possible. The income transfers should eventually replace the subsidies to agriculture like input subsidies, price support, etc. Efforts should be made to slowly bring the rich and ultra-rich farmers to the tax net, taxing the agricultural income beyond, say Rs 10 lakh. This way, the rich non-agriculturists can be taxed for their farm, agricultural income for the benefits of the nation; and that extra tax revenue from agricultural income may be earmarked for developmental activities to boost agricultural productivities and provide cushion to farmers to withstand sudden fall in farm prices, from time to time. Further, any designed intervention, in the current time, should comprise more and more technology-based solutions. It should get the political class, policy masters, senior bureaucrats and experts on the same page to formulate and implement sound policies, shunning short-termism; towards long-term growth and development. India and our Odisha need a multipronged socioeconomic strategy focussed on economic development coupled with equitable distribution of income, creation of ample gainful employments and rich and robust farm and MSME sectors.
India adds 1.25 crore population to its demography every year. How do you visualise the economic scenario fifty years ahead with another India added to it?
It would be difficult, may even be dangerous, to hazard a guess for such a long period of time. Instead of being in crystal ball gazing, let me wear my futurist hat and look at it dispassionately. We cannot underestimate the human ingenuity. Given the tremendous technological developments unfolding, given the rise of democratic values and democratisation of digital technologies and the death of distance; I feel great famines, disasters, holocausts are things of the past. They won't ever occur again anywhere in the world. Humanity in one part of the world will come to rescue of humanity in any other part facing such problems. Further, technology and newer and newer digital technologies are friends of mankind and they can harness the technology better and better over the years for the benefits of humanity so that the future challenges can be tackled effectively for our benefits. One does not know; you may find varieties of wonder pills in the market to tackle different kinds of health and other problems. Added to all these, you will find nature as a great leveller to rescue population from all sorts of problems in its own way to establish a natural equilibrium.
Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Pioneer.
For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
