 The latest round of trade talks ­between Chinese and US officials got under way in Beijing yesterday, as the March 1 deadline for a deal draws ever closer.
Deputy US Trade Representative Jeffrey Gerrish gave nothing away as he left his hotel in a downtown area of the city, dismissing reporters' questions.
He and his team are expected to set the scene for top-level talks on Thursday and Friday involving US Trade Representative Robert Lighthizer, US Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin and Vice-Premier Liu He.
An opinion piece posted by a number of Chinese official media outlets on the eve of the talks argued that the March 1 deadline was a "media topic created by the US side" and it could be extended to a later date, such as May 1.
The opinion piece, which was first published on a social media account, Taoran Notes, on WeChat on Sunday, is not a direct statement from the Chinese ­government, but it was quickly picked up by a wide range of state media, including the social media outlets of the official People's Daily and Beijing Daily, suggesting support for the argument.
"The idea of a March 1 deadline actually offers a cover for Sino-US trade talks. The real issue is not the time limit but whether China and US can reach a deal," the opinion piece said.
"If the talks go well but the two sides can't reach a deal on technical details, then it can be postponed for another two months - for instance, it should be fine if it's extended to May 1."
Under the terms of a truce agreed by Presidents Xi Jinping and Donald Trump, if a deal is not reached by March 1 the US will deliver on its threat to raise tariffs it imposed on US$200 billion worth of Chinese goods in September to 25 per cent from 10 per cent.
Washington's main complaints are a growing trade imbalance, lack of intellectual property protection and market access for American firms, cybertheft, forced technology transfers, and Beijing's subsidies for state-owned enterprises.
According to a report by The Wall Street Journal, which cited people briefed on the matter, at the last round of talks the Chinese team came up with few new proposals and instead repeated pledges already made by Xi to open up the economy.
US officials have been pushing for China to adopt deep structural reforms to address their concerns, and the latest talks are likely to focus on an enforcement mechanism for any such changes.
Led by Liu, the Chinese team will also include central bank governor Yi Gang, while Lighthizer and Mnuchin will be joined by undersecretary for international affairs David Malpass, chief agricultural negotiator Gregg Doud, undersecretary for trade and agricultural affairs Ted McKinney, and undersecretary of commerce for international trade Gilbert ­Kaplan.
Analysts remain wary that a comprehensive deal can be reached by the end of the month.
Sian Fenner, senior Asia economist at the British consultancy Oxford Economics, said the difficulty was the US wanted Beijing to agree to complex structural and institutional reforms, particularly in areas of intellectual property protection and industrial policy.
"We think it is likely that the US will again postpone the hike in tariffs from 10 per cent to 25 per cent," she said. "We also think that it is now more likely that the two sides will eventually make a deal that would mean a more lasting suspension of new tariffs."
Aside from the trade dispute, US Senate minority leader Charles Schumer will this week unveil legislation designed to curtail Chinese exports of fentanyl - a deadly synthetic drug blamed for fuelling an opioid crisis in the US - with economic sanctions on those that produce it.
Additional reporting byAgence France-Presse
