 The UK economy slowed almost to a halt at the end of last year as household and state spending kept growth afloat against a collapse in trade, manufacturing and business investment, according to official figures. In 2018, Britain grew by 1.4 per cent, down from 1.8 per cent in 2017, making it the equal weakest year since 2009. Growth in the final three months slipped to 0.2 per cent from 0.6 per cent in the previous quarter, and the slowdown worsened as the year drew to a close. Between November and December, the economy shrank by 0.4 per cent. The figures from the Office for National Statistics paint a picture of a declining economy heavily reliant on government and household spending. Hopes of an economic rebalancing from consumption were dashed as manufacturing, business investment and trade all sank into the red. Economists claimed that the quarterly data, the last before Britain is due to leave the European Union, had been clearly affected by Brexit negotiations, but that the global slowdown had also been a factor. Not all G7 countries have released fourth-quarter growth num-bers, but forecasts suggest that the UK will finish near the bottom of the pack, above Italy. Philip Hammond, the chancellor, told Sky News that "there is no doubt that our economy is being overshadowed by the uncertainty from Brexit". Liam Fox, the international trade secretary, linked the poor growth with "the slowdown in China" and Europe, including in Germany. The GDP figures fell short of the Bank of England's forecast for growth of 0.3 per cent in the final three months of 2018 and raise questions about its 0.2 per cent forecast for the first quarter of 2019. John Hawksworth, chief economist at PWC, said: "Early signs are that growth remained very subdued in January. This suggests a possible further deceleration of growth in the first quarter of 2019 as businesses hold off on major investments until the fog of uncertainty over Brexit lifts." Victoria Clarke, UK economist at Investec, said: "Clearly one point to watch is whether nervous households start to adjust their spending as the Brexit date looms closer. If [weak consumer confidence] does carry through to weaker spending, then the pace of UK economic expansion is likely to remain under pressure." The pound dropped almost a cent against the dollar, down 0.95 cents at $1.2852, as detail in the GDP data raised fears about the underlying health of the economy. Business investment shrank by 1.4 per cent in the final quarter of 2018, making it the fourth quarter in a row that companies cut their spending. Trade worsened, too, with the deficit widening by £900 million to £10.4 billion owing to an increase in imports. Manufacturing, which accounts for a tenth of GDP, shrank by 0.9 per cent, making it three out of the past four quarters that UK factory output has contracted. The services sector, which accounts for four fifths of the economy from banks to retailers to logistics, propped up growth again, expanding by 0.4 per cent in the final quarter of 2018, but its support for the economy is waning. The sector grew 1.7 per cent for 2018 as a whole, the slowest pace since 2010. Growth was also held up by "private consumption and government consumption", the ONS said, which contributed 0.52 percentage points to GDP. Philip Aldrick, page 35 CREDIT: Philip Aldrick Economics Editor CAPTION: Bone of contention Marie-Claire Kerr, artist wife of Lord Ralph Kerr, owner of Melbourne Hall in Derbyshire, is listed among creditors of Smallbone of Devizes, the designer kitchen company that collapsed last year owing millions in deposits. Page 37 JOHN COLLEY
