 Ireland is set to secure its first position on the executive board of the European Central Bank after the nomination of Philip Lane for the role of chief economist. Eurozone finance ministers yesterday backed the governor of the Central Bank of Ireland to replace Peter Praet when he steps down at the end of May. Mr Lane, below, was the only candidate for the position. His nomination still has to be ratified by EU leaders at the next EU Council meeting in March before the appointment is made official. Ireland is the only founding member of the single currency that has not held a board position at the Frankfurt-based bank. The government nominated Mr Lane for the role of vice-president of the ECB last year. He eventually made it on to a shortlist of two candidates, but lost out to Luis de Guindos, the Spanish finance minister. Sharon Donnery, the deputy governor of the Central Bank, failed at the final stage of the selection process for the role of chairwoman of the supervisory board of the ECB. Last November Ms Donnery made the shortlist of the final two candidates, but she lost to Andrea Enria, head of the European Banking Authority. If Ms Donnery had landed the role, it would have weighed on Mr Lane's prospects of becoming chief economist, as it is unlikely that other member states would have allowed Ireland to hold two senior posts at the ECB. Mr Lane, 49, was only the second governor of the Central Bank not to have been appointed directly from the Department of Finance when he took the job, which runs for a seven-year term, in 2015. He had been a surprise choice for the role as Robert Watt, the secretarygeneral of the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform, was widely tipped before the appointment was announced. Ms Donnery is the early favourite to succeed Mr Lane, although the Department of Finance has said that it will undertake an extensive trawl of potential candidates. Considered a dove closely aligned to Mario Draghi, president of the ECB, Mr Lane would be responsible for preparing monetary policy decisions, one of the most vital positions at the bank. His appointment would come at a crucial moment for the ECB, when the bank's plans for its first post-crisis rate rise are complicated by an unexpectedly sharp slowdown in the eurozone economy and weak inflation. Mr Lane would join the ECB as the bank is also facing a broad reshuffle of its key positions, with Mr Draghi's mandate ending in October and the Frenchman Benoît Coeuré, who also sits on the six-person ECB board, due to leave in December. Nearly a third of the 25-member Governing Council, which includes ECB board members and governors of national central banks, is also to be turned over this year, an unusually high ratio. Besides the three board members, the central bank governors of Belgium, Austria, Estonia, Slovakia and Cyprus are all expected to be replaced this year. Mr Lane is considered to be one of the top economists in the world. He has a PhD from Harvard and was the head of the economics department at Trinity College Dublin before he took up the position at the Central Bank. CREDIT: John Walsh Ireland Business Editor
