 House prices are expected to come under further pressure as a result of home loans plunging by the most since the global financial crisis, with economists at UBS forecasting price falls to double to about 14 per cent.
The bank’s economics team, led by George Tharenou, has predicted the Reserve Bank will be forced to cut rates after Bureau of Statistics data revealed homes loans had fallen by 6.1 per cent in December and by about 20 per cent over the past year.
The economists said homes loans were the key lead indicator in their thesis that credit was tightening.
UBS blamed the big fall off in loans to investors, which were down by 27.8 per cent in a year, but noted that owner-occupier lending was also weak, with a drop of 16.2 per cent.
“Worryingly, even first-home buyers retraced sharply after previously recovering, albeit holding a 16 per cent share of total loans, the highest since 2012,” UBS said.
“While investors corrected from a record os more than 40 per cent share in 2015 to 28 per cent now, they remain high globally.
“Separately, the trend of developer loans declined 25 to 30 per cent year-on-year, to the lowest level since 2014.
“Recent stability is a mixed sign for building approvals. The accelerating fall in home loans shows tighter credit is playing out.
“Looking ahead, while the royal commission didn’t make material changes, we downgrade our long-held forecast peak-to-trough drop in home loans from ‘20 per cent with risk of 30 per cent’, to ‘25 per cent with rising risk of 30 per cent’.” UBS also cut its peak-to-trough forecast of home prices from “falling 10 per cent or more if regulators don’t ease”, to dropping 14 per cent, even assuming the RBA cuts.
The economists warned Sydney and Melbourne could see falls closer to 20 per cent, which would be nearly triple the 7 per cent decline so far.
Other commentators have noted the falls. AMP chief economist Shane Oliver said December housing commitments showed continuing weakening, with the value of finance commitments to owner-occupiers falling and investors continuing to drop.
Dr Oliver last month downgraded his forecasts to a 25 per cent drop in Sydney and Melbourne housing prices from the market’s top to bottom, worsening from his previous prediction of a 20 per cent fall.
CoreLogic last month joined the list of property analysts downgrading their outlooks for the housing market, with head of research Tim Lawless predicting housing values in Sydney and Melbourne would fall 18-20 from peak to trough.
CoreLogic also gave a pessimistic outlook for 2019, predicting values in Sydney and Melbourne would fall 18-20 per cent from peak to trough.
ABS data yesterday showed home loan approvals fell by 6.1 per cent over the month, beating the 2 per cent fall expected by economists.
The value of loans for housing investment also fell by 4.8 per cent. Lending to housing investors was down 28 per cent on-year in December, with owner-occupier lending crunched by 16 per cent in the same period.
The fall off in housing finance has also caused a squeeze in lending to developers, as their projects become more marginal and banks step away from the residential property sector.
Foreign investor groups which drove the market in the apartment boom are also pulling back after a crackdown on selling to offshore investors.Many are quietly looking to offload their sites.
