 An exodus of investors from the housing market in the lead-up to Christmas has increased chances that the Reserve Bank will cut ­official interest rates later this year, despite a modest improvement in business confidence.
National Australia Bank dumped its expectation of a rate increase yesterday after new home loan data showed approvals dropped 6 per cent in December — triple the decline analysts had expected — while the value of loans to investors in the same month was 28 per cent lower than a year ago.
“While our central case is for the cash rate to remain on hold, based on the balance of risks, the next move in rates could well be down — potentially as soon as the second half of this year,” chief economist Alan Oster said, referring to a “relatively sharp decline in residential building activity related to the cooling in housing”.
Prices in financial markets yesterday suggested the chance of a cut in official interest rates, which have been steady at 1.5 per cent since August 2016, was 80 per cent by November, up from 50 per cent a week ago.
“This downward momentum in housing finance would concern the RBA,” said Paul Brennan, an economist at Citi, and if it continued, “we believe the RBA would likely respond by cutting interest rates earlier than the market’s pricing which is late this year”.
“The Reserve commented last week that it is paying close attention to developments in the housing market,” Mr Brennan added.
Separately, business confidence and trading conditions improved into the new year, according to NAB’s closely watched business survey for January, which partly reversed a slump in December. “There was no rebound in NSW and Victoria, and South Australia and Western Australia continue to lag,” it said.
“Conditions rose in most sectors except for mining and fin­ance, business and property services, while they remained deeply negative in retail,” said Andrew Boak, chief economist at Goldman Sachs.
“Based on confirmation that conditions have deteriorated further and our current set of forecasts, we now see the RBA staying in neutral for the foreseeable ­future, though we think the next move could be down rather than up based on the current trajectory of growth and growing downside risks” Mr Oster said.
The drop in home loans prompted UBS to pencil in a 14 per cent fall in capital city house prices nationwide, with falls of 20 per cent “peak to trough” in Sydney and Melbourne. “This is double the 7 per cent decline so far. Hence, we reiterate our non-consensus view that GDP growth slows sharply to 2.3 per cent in 2019, unemployment drifts up to 5¼ per cent, and the RBA cuts in November,” the UBS analysts said.
“Worryingly, even first-home buyers withdrew sharply after previously recovering, albeit still holding a 16 per cent share of total loans, the highest since 2012.”BUSINESS P21
