 Singapore
RETAIL sales this year could stay sluggish, analysts warned, after full-year figures were released by the Department of Statistics on Tuesday.
Cashiers here rang up 0.7 per cent less in 2018 than in the year before - the first annual decline since 2013. Stripping out auto sales, which have been on a downward jag, Singapore retail sales grew by a softer 1.1 per cent last year, against 1.8 per cent in 2017.
With consumers likely turning cautious on slower economic growth, economists told The Business Times that support for retail will depend on the local labour market - a factor that Selena Ling, head of treasury research and strategy at OCBC Bank, called "key for private consumption health".
Lee Ju Ye, an economist at Maybank Kim Eng, told BT that the headline retail sales figure could return to positive territory this year - possibly in the low single digits - on the low base effect from the motor vehicle slump, while sales excluding automobiles could match last year's showing.
"Retail sales will likely stay muted in 2019 amid the slowing economy and the deterioration in business outlook," said Ms Lee.
"The weakness will likely spread to the labour market."
But CIMB economist Song Seng Wun was surprised by how the fall was not just for discretionary goods. Bread-and-butter spending was also hit, he noted, pointing to supermarkets. Sales in that segment declined by 1.2 per cent for the full year, and have not grown since last February.
"As long as the economy remains at full employment, a repeat of 2018 is on the cards," he said - but warned that a weaker labour market could lead to a sharper decline this year.
Overall retail sales were dragged down by a 9 per cent slide in car sales, with Ms Lee noting that stricter emissions rules kicked in on Jan 1, 2018.
Computer and telecommunications equipment sales fell by 8.2 per cent.
Meanwhile, takings from medical goods and toiletries rose by 4.8 per cent, with furniture sales up by 3.5 per cent and clothing and footwear by 3.3 per cent. Department store turnover added 0.9 per cent.
Food services receipts grew by 1.2 per cent year on year - driven by a 7.1 per cent jump in fast food, rather than marginal gains of 0.3 per cent to 0.4 per cent at other kinds of eateries.
United Overseas Bank economist Barnabas Gan suggested that concerns may be unwarranted as yet.
He said the sales drop was largely on the back of vehicle and supermarket declines, which he attributed to segment-specific issues - such as fewer Certificate of Entitlement premiums, a shift from car ownership to ride-hailing services, and competition in the grocery store industry.
Retailers' modest full-year performance came in spite of a worse-than-expected year-end festive period.
Sales slid by 6 per cent in December on the previous year, for a sales value of S$4.3 billion - well below economists' median estimate of a 3.6 per cent decline, in a Bloomberg poll.
Even shorn of vehicle sales, the annual drop was 3 per cent, with medical goods and toiletries the only major retail segment to post growth.
The monthly slump could be due in part to slowing visitor arrivals, said Ms Lee. Chinese tourists may be steering clear as a slowing economy and the trade war with the United States eat into consumer sentiments there.
Food and beverage services receipts rose year on year by 4.5 per cent in December, to S$925 million.
Based on the recent data, including factory output and exports, CIMB's Mr Song now expects fourth-quarter gross domestic product figures to be trimmed by some 0.1 percentage point from flash estimates.
The government has guided for 2.2 per cent growth in the final quarter, and a full-year gain of 3.3 per cent. Final figures are due on Friday.
