 ''Could Brexit really ride to the rescue of the faltering global economy, ushering in a new golden age of globalisation? That was Mark Carney's intriguing suggestion this week. The idea will certainly have come as a surprise to those who have come to regard Britain's decision to leave the European Union as an act of naked protectionism. For all the bluster of leading Brexiteers about "global Britain", the referendum was won on a clear pledge to halt one of the main features of globalisation: the flow of migrants seeking the jobs created by the flow of global capital. Most economists regard Brexit as an act of self-harm that will lead to increased barriers to trade between Britain and its closest trading partners. It is hard to how that revives globalisation. Yet the Bank of England's governor sees Brexit — along with trade tensions abroad — as manifestations of "fundamental pressures to reorder globalisation". In particular, globalisation has revealed a tension between economic co-operation and sovereignty. "Common rules and standards are required for trade in goods, services and capital, but those rules cede, or at best pool, sovereignty. To maintain legitimacy, the process of agreeing those standards needs to be rooted in democratic legitimacy." This is where he believes Brexit may be able to help. The challenge is to find new rules of the road. "Brexit can lead to a new form of international cooperation and cross-border commerce built on a better balance of local and supranational authorities." Mr Carney is certainly right that globalisation is in urgent need of saving. In the 30 years before the onset of the global financial crisis, global trade was the engine of the global economy, growing by more than 6 per cent a year. During that time, more than a billion people were lifted out of poverty and global gross domestic product per capita was boosted by more than 40 per cent. Consumers in developed countries benefited from cheaper goods while those in developing countries have benefited from better-paid jobs. This was hardly a surprise: it has been a basic tenet of economic thinking for more than two centuries that trade benefits both parties. But since the global financial crisis, global trade growth has barely kept pace with global output growth and this year is likely to fall substantially behind, with the latest surveys pointing to a contraction. Until recently, economists took comfort from the fact that much of this slowdown appeared to reflect lower cross-border investment, rather than a sharp increase in protectionist measures. President Trump's trade war against China has blown away any such complacency, with US tariffs weighing on global confidence and investment. The Bank of England estimates that a further ten percentage-point rise in tariffs between the United States and its trading partners could knock 2.5 per cent off US output and 1 per cent off global GDP. Yet it may be asking too much of Brexit to think that it can save the global trading system. The forces of deglobalisation may be too strong and hard to reverse. The first problem is that past eras of globalisation have relied on a sole global hegemon to guarantee the system, whether Great Britain in the 19th century or the US in the late 20th. The emergence of a rival power, such as Germany in the early 20th century, puts strain on the system since it raises questions about security of supply of scarce resources. China's emergence as a strategic rival to the US is putting similar strains on the global trading system today. A second problem is that while free movement of capital and goods may bring substantial gains to the average citizen, they can lead to substantial inequalities within countries. The backlash against the first great era of globalisation at the end of the 19th century took the form of a revolt against mass migration that suppressed the wages of the new industrial working classes in Europe's booming cities and from rural landlords who faced declining incomes as a result of foreign competition. This fuelled demands for greater protection and ultimately found in expression in rising nationalisms, which many historians cite as a factor in the origins of the First World War. A similar polarisation between the perceived winners and losers of globalisation is fuelling nationalism today. A third problem relates to the financial effects of globalisation, which can lead to imbalances between countries that run persistent trade surpluses and those that run persistent deficits. Since deficit countries are reliant on external borrowing, they are vulnerable to sudden stops in funding that can have devastating economic and social consequences. This was what triggered the collapse of the post-First World War global trading system. Similar strains can be seen today, not least in the eurozone, where the full burden of economic adjustment arising as a result of the bloc's debt crisis has fallen on deficit countries, fuelling resentment and support for populist parties. Do the multilateral and supranational institutions that oversee today's global trading system have the capacity to adapt to these pressures more successfully than those of the past? That's unclear. What has become apparent is that the decisionmaking processes at the World Trade Organisation and the EU are broken, since changing the rules of the system typically relies on a unanimity that is impossible to achieve. Brexit is unlikely to change that. What does seem likely is that a disorderly Brexit that led to the sudden emergence of trade barriers between the world's fifth largest economy and its major trading partners would have a devastating global economic impact and prove so damaging to confidence in global governance as to make future reform all but impossible. Can Brexit save globalisation? Perhaps not, but it could certainly kill it." Simon Nixon is chief leader writer of The Times CREDIT: Simon Nixon CAPTION: Mark Carney thinks Brexit can lead to a new form of international co-operation
