 BREXITEER Liam Halligan was heckled by audience members when he warned a no deal Brexit has been “demonised” during a heated row with Europhile MP Ken Clarke.
The Brexit-supporting economist got into a heated debate with the Tory Remainer while speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Any Questions? debate show in the Remain-supporting village of Llithfaen in north-west Wales. The fiery debate was sparked by BBC host Jonathan Dimbleby, who asked Mr Halligan whether it would be a smart decision to prevent a no deal Brexit. The comments were a result of MPs’ decision this week to vote against the Government's Brexit motion, with Brexiteers fearing it would take the threat of leaving the EU without a deal off the negotiating table.
Related articles MP says May's deal will lead to 'endless uncertainty' but WTO will NOT Brexit warning: No-deal vegetable tariffs could cause 12,400 deaths
The economist said: “The only thing we have seen get a majority in Parliament is the so-called Malthouse compromise, which is Theresa May’s deal with an exception made on the Irish backstop.
“I think the Irish backstop would be disastrous for this country, it would keep us in a customs union…”
But the BBC host intervened and said: “Liam, I know it is tiresome if you like, but it is a quite important territory. Do you believe in practice, regardless of your opinion, that the House of Commons will not allow in the end a no deal Brexit?”
The Brexiteer replied: “I am trying hard, Jonathan, to build an answer if you will allow me to.
Brexit news: Liam Halligan hit back at no deal Project Fear claims
“The Malthouse compromise, I believe, if it is put forward and if the European Commission allowed it to be brought forward if there is less intransigence from Brussels.”
The BBC audience then booed as Mr Halligan attempted to continue. He said: “I think that the Malthouse compromise would go through Parliament. It is the only thing that has so far got a majority.”
Arch-Remainer Ken Clarke then asked if the economist would accept no deal, adding: “Suddenly overnight every legal trading security relationship with every other country in the world, practically, would collapse.”
Mr Halligan fired back and said: “You say that but why does the ex-head of MI6, Sir Richard Dearlove, who knows a fair bit about security say that no deal is the only viable way to leave the European Union.”
The pair continued to shout over each other before Mr Halligan blasted: “No deal is being demonised. Most of our trade across the world is on WTO rules.”
The economist was then heckled by the audience following the claim regarding no deal.
BBC host was then forced to intervene as the pair continued to argue over the likelihood of a World Trade Organisation Brexit.
The UK is set to leave the EU by law on March 29 with or without a deal unless Article 50 is extended to give the Prime Minister more time to discuss the details with Brussels.
The Prime Minister told the Commons on Monday that Britain is ramping up preparations for a no deal Brexit.
She said: ”We are continuing our preparations for no deal.
“We are obviously engaging not just with government departments.
“We are engaging with devolved administrations, with Northern Ireland civil service and we are engaging with local authorities up and down the country.
“And obviously working with businesses and those that would need to make alterations to their operations in the event of no deal, we continue to ramp up those preparations.”
