 The first U.S. military aircraft carrying aid for Venezuela arrived in Colombia on Saturday as the Trump administration steps up pressure to oust embattled President Nicolás Maduro, whose authoritarian government has blocked foreign donations.
The three C-17 cargo planes arrived in the Colombian border city of Cúcuta, where thousands of Venezuelans flee each day to escape the deepening economic crisis in a country that was once Latin America's richest nation.
The planes, which departed from the Homestead Air Reserve Base in Miami, brought hygiene kits with soap and toothbrushes, and nutritional products for some 3,500 malnourished children, according to the U.S. Agency for International Development.
"As long as the Maduro regime and his cronies plague Venezuela with economic mismanagement and corruption, we all know this humanitarian crisis will continue," USAID administrator Mark Green said Saturday during a news conference in front of the military aircraft. "Maduro must go."
The aid is at the center of a political showdown between Mr. Maduro and opposition leader Juan Guaidó, who is recognized by the U.S. and dozens of other countries as Venezuela's interim president.
Mr. Maduro has vowed to prevent the aid from entering Venezuela, saying it is a Trojan horse that would lead to a U.S. military invasion. His vice president, Delcy Rodríguez, has claimed the food donations are poisoned, an assertion that Mr. Green called absurd.
"The United States is helping along with many other countries because Maduro and his regime are failing to feed their own people," Mr. Green said.
Economists blame Venezuela's crisis on years of economic mismanagement, wasteful public spending and widespread corruption. Some 3 million Venezuelans—a 10th of the population—have fled the country, according to the United Nations.
The delivery of aid follows U.S. sanctions on state oil company PdVSA, which economists say will deepen Venezuela's economic collapse this year unless there is political change. Venezuela relies on oil exports for most of its hard currency income.
Previous Coverage
* U.S. Sanctions Venezuela's Oil Chief, Says Food Aid Will Be Flown to Border
* Venezuela Opposition's Man in D.C. Seeks to Rally U.S. Support
The first shipments are part of a total of 250 metric tons of humanitarian aid that are scheduled to be shipped to Cúcuta before Feb. 23, the day that Mr. Guaidó has announced the aid will be brought into Venezuela by an army of volunteers the opposition is organizing.
"This is a chess game, one side makes a move the other then tries to block it," says a U.S. official involved in the aid effort. "How it will play out, we don't know."
Aid is also going to be collected in Roraima, Brazil, and the Dutch Caribbean island of Curaçao.
U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio (R., Fla.) said pressure will continue to increase on Mr. Maduro. He said he knew of members of the Venezuelan president's inner circle who are looking to abandon him.
"Maduro thinks he can wait this out. Just buy time until the protests lose momentum & the world loses interest," Mr. Rubio wrote on Twitter. "Not gonna happen! It only gets worse for him from here."
Still, it is unclear whether Mr. Guaidó's gamble to get the aid into Venezuela next week and convince military officials to disobey Mr. Maduro's orders will work.
On Saturday, about 50 women dressed in white protested across the border from Cúcuta in the Venezuelan town of Ureña, calling for the government to let the aid in. The demonstration was later broken up by soldiers and police.
"We're fighting for liberty, so our children don't have to go abroad," said Marianeli Quintero, a 48-year-old teacher who was protesting. "There are so many people that need the medicine and food."
Lester Toledo, an opposition politician coordinating the delivery of the aid, said he was confident the donations would reach impoverished Venezuelans.
"The aid is going to get in, there's no doubt about it," he said in Cúcuta. "We have to be patient, but in seven days, you'll see the aid there."
Maolis Castro and Daniela Blandon contributed to this article.
Write to Ryan Dube at ryan.dube@dowjones.com and José de Córdoba at jose.decordoba@wsj.com
