 Chinese and American negotiators are facing a critical moment in the next two weeks as they try to keep a lid on tensions and reach a deal to end the trade war.
Officials from both sides said progress was made in the latest round of talks that wrapped up in Beijing on Friday, saying tough issues remained and the negotiations would continue in Washington in the coming week.
Direct damage to China's economy would be limited should the US proceed with a tariff increase on US$200 billion of Chinese goods - from 10 to 25 per cent - when the truce ends on March 1, analysts said. But they warned the move would hurt business sentiment and worsen tensions in areas far beyond trade.
Economists said higher tariffs may hurt China's gross domestic product growth by less than 1 per cent, but Beijing was keen to delay or avert the tariff increase because there would be worrisome effects on business confidence and on other strategic fronts, particularly technology.
Washington has already raised alarms about Beijing's industrial policies on hi-tech development and the national security implications of Chinese telecoms giant Huawei's 5G technology.
This latest talks were the third round held since December 1, when President Xi Jinping and US counterpart Donald Trump agreed to suspend further tariff increases for 90 days.
Officials said they were working over Christmas and Lunar New Year holiday. Trump met a Chinese delegation headed by Vice-Premier Liu He in Washington in late January.
Observers said there would probably be an acceleration of manufacturers shifting their supply chains out of China, and spillover into other strategic areas between Washington and Beijing.
Kevin Lai, an analyst from Daiwa Capital Markets, said in a report that if the US raised tariffs not only on the scheduled US$200 billion of Chinese goods but on all US$500 billion in Chinese exports to the US - a measure Trump has said is not off the table - it would reflect a level of confrontation that bleeds into other flashpoints between the countries, such as the South China Sea, Taiwan and Beijing's "Belt and Road Initiative".
"Essentially, tariffs would no longer be a bargaining chip used to bring China to the negotiating table or extract more concessions from China," Lai said. "Rather, they would be part of a longer-term strategy to unplug China from globalisation, contain its economic power … and give the US a greater strategic advantage."
Aidan Yao, senior emerging Asia economist at AXA Investment Managers, said the additional duties could trim China's GDP by 0.9 percentage points over six months.
"Trade is the most eye-catching element … but if you think deeper down, the US and China are actually fighting a technology war," Yao said. "Even if China and the US agree to something on the trade front before March 1 … I think the tensions … over technology dominance are going to continue in the coming years."
In a statement issued after talks in wrapped up on Friday, the White House said its delegation had focused on a range of disputes, starting with forced technology transfers, intellectual property rights and cyber theft. Washington has placed tariffs on US$250 billion worth of Chinese goods, while Beijing has returned fire with duties on US$110 billion worth of American goods.
Raymond Yeung, chief China economist at Melbourne-based ANZ Bank, said that in the worst case scenario, if tariffs were raised on the further US$200 billion in Chinese goods, it would largely be market sentiment in China that would be affected, since the country's growth is more domestically driven than export-driven.
"Exports from China to the US makes up just one-fifth of total Chinese exports," he said. "It is more about the market sentiment and how the two biggest economies can together prevent their relationship from worsening."
Jianwei Xu, economist at the French bank Natixis, said the impact of higher tariffs "will be more prominent during the initial phase of … implementation, but later on China will gradually export more to other countries, which would relieve the pain."
"What we should be more worried about is the indirect effect the trade war has on business confidence. A no-deal ending would strongly suggest a more uncertain relationship between China and the US, and this would be a worry for investors' confidence in the Chinese market."
