 The "new dawn" for wages growth continued even as the economy stalled at the end of last year, official figures are set to show this week. City economists are forecasting a 3.5% annual rise in the average weekly wage during the final quarter of 2018 — the fastest rate in more than a decade. The good news for earners comes despite economic growth slowing to a crawl in the three months to the end of December, rounding out the worst year since 2009. Employment has grown strongly in recent months even though Brexit is clouding business confidence. "There's a bit of a paradox — it was a dismal performance from business investment, but that doesn't seem to have had much effect on hiring," said Martin Beck, lead UK economist at Oxford Economics. "Firms haven't been investing in capital equipment, but taking on more workers is seen as a less risky option." The unemployment rate is expected to stay at a four-decade low of 4%, helping to boost wages as businesses face tougher competition for staff. The average wage is also likely to have been lifted by hiring in higher-paid sectors, Beck added. Andy Haldane, the Bank of England's chief economist, heralded a "new dawn" for pay after a decade in which workers' income barely budged. The recent decline in inflation has offered a further boost to cash-strapped households. The consumer prices index fell to a two-year low of 1.8% last month, partly thanks to the introduction of the energy price cap. However, some economists worry that with the economy struggling, wage growth may be peaking. Once inflation is taken into account, the rise in earnings is only at a two-year high. "The pessimistic interpretation would be that wages are a bit of a lagging indicator, and the wider slowdown in the economy could see wage growth slow down this year," said Beck. Separate figures due to be published this week will disclose the government's budget surplus for January — a crucial month for corporation tax receipts. Economists are forecasting a slight improvement on the £9.3bn surplus posted a year ago. David Smith, page 4 The future is on hold, page 5 CREDIT: Tommy Stubbington CAPTION: City economists expect a 3.5% rise for 2018
