 Steve Marwood's job is to oil the wheels of British industry — quite literally. Yet the boss of Interflon UK, which imports and distributes specialist lubricants used in factory production lines, has recently seen his own expansion plans all but grind to a halt. The Stockton-on-Tees company has tripled the amount of stock it is holding to prepare for the potential disruption resulting from a no-deal Brexit. With cash tied up in a new warehouse, that means there is not as much money available to hire and train the staff Marwood needs for a concerted sales push in southern England. "As a company, we're Brexit ready — but that's come at a cost," said Marwood. "I don't want to overstretch, so I have slowed down recruitment. We're holding back at the moment." Marwood's reluctance to commit is typical. A decline in business investment, which fell in all four quarters last year, was at the heart of the economy's weakest year since 2009, with growth running at just 1.4%. If bosses such as Marwood will not spend, it matters — particularly for an economy that has always struggled to generate levels of business investment as high as in other big economies. Today's investment leads to tomorrow's productivity improvements and, therefore, growth. "Britain has suffered from underinvestment for a long time," said Vicky Pryce, former joint head of the Government Economic Service and chief economic adviser at the Centre for Economics and Business Research. "But since the referendum, this tendency has been supercharged." Of course, it is impossible to say exactly how much of the drop-off in spending is down to Brexit. The international backdrop is far from auspicious. Figures last week confirmed that the eurozone is growing no faster than Brexit-hit Britain, with Germany narrowly dodging recession and Italy already in one. China is also a concern, with a front page editorial in state-run Economic Information Daily indicating that growth in the world's second-largest economy could slow to 6% this quarter — worse than Beijing had expected. Still, there is a growing body of evidence that highprofile announcements from companies such as Nissan, which has cancelled plans to build its new X-Trail in Sunderland, and Airbus, which has threatened to shift its spending out of the UK, are part of a homegrown investment recession. In a speech last week, Bank of England governor Mark Carney described how an investment recovery after the financial crisis had stalled since 2016, despite continuing growth in other big economies. However, given that the current malaise is mainly about Brexit, there could be a silver lining. If Theresa May dodges the no-deal outcome that business dreads and gets to work on a UK-EU trade deal, much of the delayed investment might return. Carney — so often caricatured as a servant of Project Fear — admitted as much last year when he said Brexit progress would mean "a boom in investment and potentially consumption could be unlocked". George Buckley, chief UK economist at investment bank Nomura, said: "The big question here is how much investment has been postponed, and how much has been scrapped? The longer uncertainty goes on, the more likely it is that investment won't be resurrected. Even so, some of it is going to come back." For some, the gloom around the economy's recent performance is overdone. Growth is not bad, considering the Brexit fog engulfing business, said Berenberg economist Kallum Pickering. "A lot of Europe has been softer than the UK, and the UK has the additional risks around Brexit to contend with," said Pickering. "Investment has been weak, but consumers have carried on spending. It shows the underlying strength of the economy." For Marwood at Interflon, the current uncertainty means a delay, not an end, to his growth plans. "We just need to know what's going to happen," he said. "If we know that trading is going to be uninterrupted then we can focus again on bringing people in." £800m The amount Brexit has cost the UK economy every week since the referendum, according to a Bank of England policymaker 3.7% The year-on-year drop in business investment in the final quarter of 2018 1.4% Britain's economic growth last year, the weakest since 2009 CREDIT: Tommy Stubbington
