 JEAN-CLAUDE Juncker, the president of the European Commission, has been actively involved in the Brexit negotiations, however, Britain should have instead reached an agreement with the big EU nations, two leading economists claim in their book.
Theresa May is to hold fresh Brexit talks with Mr Juncker next week, following her symbolic defeat in Parliament last Thursday. Downing Street said the Prime Minister remained committed to securing changes to the text of the legally-binding withdrawal agreement, which includes the Northern Ireland backstop. However, her attempts to convince the EU chief to renegotiate are expected to fail, as Mr Juncker has repeatedly said the EU will not abandon the Irish issue.
Related articles Europe could face ‘RECESSION’ if EU rejects UK Brexit demands BREXIT LIVE: 'History will judge us ALL!'
Following his perceived unwillingness to reopen negotiations, many Conservative Brexiteers have criticised the EU boss, claiming he has no interest in trying to get a good deal for the 27 members of the bloc.
In a bid to stop the deadlock, Downing Street announced Mrs May will also hold talks with all the European Union leaders.
According to 2018 book, "Clean Brexit: Why Leaving the EU still makes sense" by authors and economists Liam Halligan and Gerard Lyons, Britain should have negotiated in the first place with big EU nations, chiefly Germany, and not Mr Juncker.
Recalling one of the first meetings between Mrs May and Mr Juncker held in May 2017, the two authors claimed it was already clear that the EU chief would have done “everything he could to frustrate, delay and even prevent the exit”.
According to two economists, Britain should have not negotiated with Jean-Claude Juncker
The president of the European Commission has been actively involved in the Brexit negotiations
They wrote: "After what had seemingly been a constructive working dinner, one of Juncker’s aides then rang a German newspaper and said that Prime Minister Theresa May was ‘deluded’ for suggesting any UK ‘divorce payment’ relating to Brexit should be linked to a mutually beneficial UK-EU free trade agreement.
"The following day, the Commission helped to fuel speculation in the British press that the UK should pay [Euro]100 billion to leave the EU, up from the earlier [Euro]60 billion estimate. Anonymous ‘Brussels sources’ accused May of ‘living in another galaxy’, while speculating that ‘more likely than not’ the Brexit talks would fail.
"Downing Street initially ‘refused to comment on leaks’ following the infa-mous Juncker dinner. As the press frenzy grew, though, the Prime Minister felt compelled to speak out: ‘Events over the last few days have shown that some in Brussels don’t want these talks to succeed and don’t want Britain to prosper,’ she said, accusing EU officials of seeking to influence the outcome of the June 2017 UK general election."
According to the economists, it was already clear in 2017 Mr Juncker would have tried to stop Brexit
Mr Halligan and Mr Lyons claimed that as Britain heads for the exit, "the Commission is deeply concerned about losing the UK’s annual contribution - some £13.1 billion in 2016, or £8.6 billion in net terms."
They wrote: "So Juncker wanted to do everything he could to frustrate, delay and even help prevent that exit."
The economists noted that the Luxembourgish politician "represents the Commission - not the EU", and for this reason "it is the big EU nations, chiefly Germany" with whom the UK should have ultimately negotiated.
The two concluded that it is in the interests of all the country members to strike a good deal with the UK.
Crédito: By Martina Bet
