 Singapore is feeling the pinch of China's economic slowdown as exports to the mainland collapsed last month.
Non-oil exports to China slumped 25.4 per cent for the month, while oil exports to the country were off by 30.8 per cent, showing a broad-based decline and sparking concern about the prospects of both ­economies.
Sales of gold to the mainland collapsed 94.9 per cent, while ­specialised machinery exports fell 55.2 per cent and measuring ­instruments declined 40.9 per cent.
Overall, Singapore's non-oil exports dropped 10.1 per cent in January, the third successive monthly decline, while oil exports declined 3.2 per cent.
Robert Carnell, chief economist at ING for Asia-Pacific, said "the negative petrochemical ­result is very worrying".
"This points to a broad weakness in external demand, with these products ubiquitous in ­almost all production and packaging," Carnell said.
Economists polled by Thomson Reuters had predicted a 1.6 per cent drop in the non-oil exports sector, showing the situation was worse than expected.
It also marked the biggest fall-off in exports since October 2016.
The drop in the non-oil sector was led by a slump in electronics exports, which declined 15.9 per cent on a year-on-year basis.
Within that, there was a 34.3 per cent decrease in personal computer exports.
Enterprise Singapore, the government agency for supporting business, put the slump down to a "high base" one year ago, while there were also seasonal issues, including the annual trend that electronics sales decline at the start of the year, as was the case in 2015, 2016 and 2018.
However, there are concerns that Singapore may be heavily ­exposed to an economic downturn in China, which is its second-largest export partner at 16 per cent, behind Hong Kong at 19 per cent.
Few of the goods imported to Hong Kong are consumed in the city, with a large portion of the 75 per cent that is exported going to the mainland.
Singapore's economic performance is also commonly viewed as a good indicator of the health of the global trading picture, given the city state's heavy reliance on imports and ­exports.
Exports of goods and services were worth 173.35 per cent of its gross domestic product in 2017, meaning the value of goods exported from Singapore was far more valuable than what was ­produced inside the city state, ­reflecting its important status as a shipping, logistics and transshipment hub.
Data from Singapore's trade ministry released last week showed the economy grew 1.9 per cent year on year in the fourth quarter, down from the 2.4 per cent recorded in the previous three months.
"A sharper-than-expected slowdown of the Chinese ­economy could adversely affect the ­region's growth due to falling ­import demand from China, especially given the regional ­economies' close interlinkages with China through their participation in manufacturing- and trade-related services value chains," the ministry said.
"Against this backdrop, the pace of growth in the Singapore economy is expected to slow in 2019."
Also released yesterday, ­Thailand's GDP growth jumped to 3.7 per cent for the final quarter of 2018 year on year, up from 3.2 per cent in the third quarter.
The figure beat a Bloomberg poll of economists, which predicted a rise of 3.6 per cent, but ­analysts said Thailand, as with most Asian export hubs, was also vulnerable to the wider ­slowdown in demand.
"GDP growth in Thailand picked up in the fourth quarter, but it is likely to struggle for momentum in the quarters ahead due to ­weaker external demand," said Gareth Leather, the senior Asia economist at Capital Economics.
"The key risk to the outlook is the possibility of unrest if the ­electorate feels it is being denied free and fair elections, which are expected to be held on March 24."
Thailand will hold general elections nearly five years after the military seized power for the ­second time in two decades from the country's powerful Shina­watra clan.
Crédito: Finbarr Berminghamfinbarr.bermingham@scmp.com
