 India's economy expanded at a much faster rate than initially estimated in the last two fiscal years, according to revised numbers released by the government, which show that growth remained high despite disruptions from demonetisation and the rollout of goods and services tax.
The statistics office on Thursday revised the growth rate for India's gross domestic product for fiscal 2017 to 8.2% from the 7.1% reported earlier. The government had announced demonetisation on November 8, 2016, partly impacting the fiscal year through March 2017.
The growth estimate for fiscal 2018, the first full year after demonetisation and which also included the first nine months of GST, was raised to 7.2% from 6.7% in the first revised estimates for FY18. The data indicate a sharper slowdown between the two years than estimated earlier.
The gap widened to a full percentage point from 0.4 percentage point earlier.
Growth for FY16 was revised down to 8% from the 8.2% estimated earlier, partly magnifying the growth for FY17, the best year of growth for the Narendra Modi government.
The revisions are likely to further politicise the country's statics, as they show the BJP-led NDA widening the lead over the previous UPA regime in terms of growth. The average growth in the five years of the NDA works out to 7.6% against 6.7% for the UPA-2, as per the back-series growth data released earlier this year.
"There is an all-round Upward Revision Across All Sectors, led by agriculture," said DK Joshi, chief economist at Crisil.
The statistics offices said the revision was on account of use of latest available data on agricultural and industrial production, government expenditure, and also more comprehensive numbers from source agencies like the Ministry of Corporate Affairs and Nabard.
Some economists expressed surprise at the numbers.
"The revised numbers have changed the narrative which seemed real for two years ending 2017-18. These higher numbers don't gel with the plight of SMEs or corporate results, or farmer distress. It raises question of whether at all advance estimates coming early makes sense, especially if they can change by one percentage point. Outside world would also be apprehensive of taking this data at face value," said Madan Sabnavis, chief economist at CARE Ratings.
"The revision in the data is surprising and it turns the story of a slowdown beginning from Q2FY17 on its head," said Soumya Kanti Ghosh, group chief economic adviser at State Bank of India. "Thus, the common notion that the slowdown in GDP growth had started well before Q3FY17, when the demonetisation happened, now begs a completely different explanation," he added.
As per State Bank of India, the surge in consumption expenditure in FY17 was possibly because of people unlocking the cash after demonetisation and converting that into purchases. "With cash coming back into the system and remonetisation now complete, people have now slowed down their consumption that perhaps was a forced and preloaded one when demonetisation happened," said Ghosh.
"We are confused that if the economy was growing above 8% after demonetisation, then why was a rate cut required," said another economist, requesting anonymity, referring to the government's demand that the central bank reduce interest rate.
The provisional estimates show that gross value added grew 6.9% in 2017-18, driven by higher primary sector growth. It was previously estimated at 6.5%.
Nominal GDP, or GDP at current prices, has been revised to 11.3% from 10% for 2017-18, and to 11.5% from 10.8% for 2016-17.
For 2017-18, the growth rates of primary (agriculture, forestry, fishing, and mining and quarrying), secondary (manufacturing, electricity, gas, water supply and other utility services, and construction) and tertiary (services) sectors have been estimated at 5%, 6% and 8.1% as against 6.8%, 7.5% and 8.4%, respectively, for the previous year.
