 Savers face the prospect of their already paltry earnings on term deposits paying even less if, as a growing band of economists believe, the Reserve Bank cuts interest rates this year.
Four years ago, term deposits paid about 4 per cent a year. They now pay an average 2.5 per cent.
BB Parreno is one of those who lives off their savings and is wondering where to put her cash to earn a better return.
The 25-year-old from the Philippines has been living in Sydney for a year while studying leadership and management.
She is living off her savings, a good portion of which she has in term deposits with Australian banks.
"What's the point of putting your money in a savings account? Term deposits are paying hardly anything and I am living off the money," she says.
"I need to earn more on the money and am looking at alternatives but I don't want to take risks."
Lenders have been dropping term deposit rates since December. It is partly in response to slower growth in mortgage lending, which means lenders don't need to raise as much in deposits.
It is also likely to be because more lenders think the Reserve Bank will cut the cash rate at least once this year.
Most market watchers are still expecting the cash rate to be left on hold by the Reserve Bank at its first meeting for the year on Tuesday.
However, a growing minority is expecting the cash rate, which has remained at 1.5 per cent since August 2016, to be lower by the end of 2019. Comparison site Finder polls 28 experts every month on what the Reserve Bank is likely to do.
"While all expect the cash rate to remain at 1.5 per cent on Tuesday, we have seen a dramatic swing in the predicted direction of the next move in the cash rate," says Graham Cooke, Insights Manager at Finder.
For the past two years, about 80 per cent of the experts have predicted the next change in the cash rate, when it comes, would be up. This month, only 40 per cent did.
Shane Oliver, chief economist at AMP Capital, is expecting the cash rate to be 1 per cent by the end of the year.
Dr Oliver says falling house prices make consumers feel less wealthy and inclined to spend less.
Usually, a cut to the cash rate, while bad for savers, is good for those with variable-rate mortgages. But that relationship no longer holds as true, with many lenders increasing their mortgage interest rates, despite no change in the cash rate.
Dr Oliver thinks the rate cuts are more likely to be made in the second half of the year, as the Reserve Bank would be reluctant to cut rates until after the federal election, due in May. If he is right, savers would be best off locking in term deposit rates now.
Comparison site Mozo lists Arab Bank's one-year term deposit rate of 3 per cent as the best on its database. The best of the big banks is NAB at 2.4 per cent for one year.
The best three-year term deposit rate is 3 per cent, which is offered by several lenders.
The best of the online savers, where the money is at call, is the MOVE Bonus Saver account, which pays a rate of 2.9 per cent for savers who are able to deposit at least $200 each month without making any withdrawals.
There are plenty of economists, such Craig James, chief economist at CommSec, who expect rates to stay on hold. Mr James says the next move in rates, when it comes, is more likely to be up, as the job market tightens and lifts wages and prices over time.
