 Savers face the prospect of their already paltry earnings on term deposits paying even less if, as a growing band of economists believe, the Reserve Bank cuts interest rates this year.
Four years ago, term deposits paid about 4 per cent a year. They now pay an average 2.5 per cent.
BB Parreno is one of those who lives off their savings and is wondering where to put her cash to earn a better return.
The 25-year-old from the Philippines has been living in Sydney for a year while studying leadership and management.
She is living off her savings, a good portion of which she has in term deposits with Australian banks.
"What's the point of putting your money in a savings account," she says. "Term deposits are paying hardly anything and I am living off the money.
"I need to earn more on the money and am looking at alternatives but I don't want to take risks with the money."
Lenders have been dropping term deposit rates since December.
It is partly a response to slower growth in mortgage lending, which means lenders don't need to raise as much in deposits.
It is also likely to be because more lenders think the Reserve Bank will cut the cash rate at least once this year.
Most economists and other market watchers expect the cash rate to be left on hold by the Reserve Bank at its first meeting for the year on Tuesday. However, a growing minority is expecting the rate, which has remained unchanged at 1.5 per cent since August 2016, to be lower by the end of the year.
Comparison site Finder polls 28 experts and economists every month on what the Reserve Bank is likely to do.
"While all expect the cash rate to remain at 1.5 per cent on Tuesday, we have seen a dramatic swing in the predicted direction of next move in the cash rate," says Graham Cooke, Insights Manager at Finder.
For the past two years, about 80 per cent of experts have predicted that the next change in the cash rate, when it comes, would be up. This month, only 40 per cent did.
Mr Cooke says the severity of the housing downturn has probably caused many experts to change their forecast.
Shane Oliver, AMP Capital chief economist, is expecting the cash rate to be 1 per cent by year's end.
"Economic growth will not be as strong as the Reserve Bank is expecting . . . and the main reason for that is housing construction is starting to slow down and that will detract from economic growth," he says.
He says falling house prices make consumers feel less wealthy and inclined to spend less.
Usually, a cut to the cash rate, while bad for savers, is good for those with variable-rate mortgages.
But that relationship no longer holds as true, with many lenders increasing their mortgage interest rates in recent times, despite no change in the cash rate.
Dr Oliver thinks the rate cuts are more likely to be made in second half of the year, as the Reserve Bank would be reluctant to cut rates until after federal election, due in May.
If his view is right, savers would be best off locking in term deposit rates now.
Comparison site Mozo lists Arab Bank's one-year term deposit rate of 3 per cent as the best on its database. The best of the big banks is NAB at 2.4 per cent for one year.
The best 3-year term deposit rate is 3 per cent, which is offered by several lenders.
The best of the online savers, where the money is at call, is the MOVE Bonus Saver account, which pays a rate of 2.9 per cent for savers who are able to deposit at least $200 into the account each month without making any withdrawals.
Peter Marshall, spokesman for Mozo, thinks the Reserve Bank will cut rates this year.
"Inflation numbers released on Wednesday came in a 1.8 per cent for 2018 and that's quite low and provides some comfort for the Reserve Bank to drop the cash rate without risking a breakout of inflation," Mr Marshall says.
Craig James, chief economist at CommSec, expects rates to stay on hold for the foreseeable future.
