 Financial markets have already factored in a Labor victory in the looming federal election, as the Coalition struggles to make up ground in the polls and business becomes accustomed to the prospect of Bill Shorten as prime minister.
A Sunday Age survey of 18 leading economists has urged voters to deliver whoever wins government a clear majority to ensure reforms can get through Parliament and deliver investment certainty.
The Scope panel found that confidence was likely to decline in the months before the expected May poll, with firms delaying decisions until after the election.
JP Morgan's Sally Auld said changes to housing, share dividend imputation and industrial relations policies under a Labor government could cause firms to pause before deciding on hiring workers or investing in capital.
"Generally we tend to see business confidence and employment growth decline ahead of a federal election," she said.
But financial markets are unlikely to be fazed by the four-month election campaign, the economists found.
"A Labor win is already factored into expectations in the financial markets," said Monash University economist Jakob Madsen.
"Thus the financial markets are unlikely to react much to the election campaign."
The Morrison government trailed Labor by 46 to 54 per cent in a two-party preferred terms in the most recent Age poll in December. News Corp's Newspoll had that at 47-53 in January, a result that would still see a comfortable victory for Labor.
Sarah Hunter from BIS <loc>Oxford</loc> economics said a clear policy platform was key.
"What businesses want is certainty, a clear view on what the regulatory tax environment is going to look like, that they can plan around," she said.
Housing is looming as the key election threat for both parties, with house price falls in <loc>Sydney</loc> and <loc>Melbourne</loc> that could go south of 15 per cent in a year by May.
Such a drop is likely to cramp consumer spending as nervous homeowners opt to save instead of spend, slowing economic growth and reducing government tax revenue.
The Coalition has launched a daily campaign against Labor's negative gearing policy, which will be grand-fathered for existing investors, but the government maintains will have a dampening effect on a housing market already in decline.
Housing Industry Association economist Tim Reardon said the policy would have an adverse impact on new home sales.
"But as long as there's a clear majority that comes out of the federal election, <loc>Australia</loc> will be able to work towards positive government policy that starts driving private and foreign investment again," he said.
The panel said the biggest threats to the local economy remained overseas through slowdowns in <loc>China</loc> and the <loc>United States</loc> amid trade tensions.
Industry Super's Stephen Anthony said the federal election was "particular poorly timed given rising uncertainty around domestic and global market conditions" and that both parties were likely to spend big to win voters given the precedent set by the recent Victorian election.
Michael Blythe from the Commonwealth Bank was more circumspect.
He said the underlying business cycle trends would be more dominant than any electoral disruption.
"Other indicators such as employment, retail trade, building approvals and vehicle sales show no obvious divergence from broader economic trends around elections," he said.
