 One of the questions regularly posed by the European Commission's polling body Eurobarometer asks citizens whether the impact of the economic crisis on jobs has peaked, or whether the worst is yet to come. The most recent poll, conducted in November, shows that EU voters are split, with 44% backing each position. People in Ireland have a much rosier outlook, however, with 76% of Irish respondents saying the worst had passed — the highest proportion of optimists in the EU. Only 18% of people here believe darker days are ahead. Eurobarometer did not ask people when they believed the next recession would occur, but the warning signs are gathering. Economic growth statistics released last week confirmed that, in the final three months of 2018, Italy's economy contracted for a second consecutive quarter, technically putting the country in recession. European Central Bank (ECB) statistics show lending to non-financial companies in Italy has been rapidly contracting since the coalition between the populist Five Star Movement and far-right Lega party took power in June, slumping an alarming 5.5% in December alone. The euro area, formed in 1999, is celebrating its 20th birthday on the brink of another downturn. Something is seriously wrong when the resolutely globalist Economist magazine concludes — as it did in January — that "the euro has been an economic fiasco". In the same month, David Lipton, the first deputy managing director of the International Monetary Fund, warned that history indicated a downturn was somewhere over the horizon and recent signs of slowing global growth should underline the need to prepare for unexpected developments. In essence there are three broad approaches that public authorities should follow in order to reduce the likelihood of a fresh recession and to minimise the impact of such a downturn: 1. Reinforce economic policy co-ordination A decade ago, global policymakers reacted in a co-ordinated manner to the threat of global depression. In America, a policy begun under the president George W Bush was inherited and continued under his successor Barack Obama in a pretty seamless fashion. Suppose that in 21 months' time the US is beset by recession, and Donald Trump is beaten to the White House by, say, Senator Kamala Harris — according to bookies' odds, currently the Democratic frontrunner. Can you imagine a seamless economic policy transition as in 2008-9? Not only was economic policy co-ordinated within America in reaction to the Global Financial Crisis, it was co-ordinated at a global level too. The November 2008 G20 summit in Washington was the first summit dedicated to the crisis. While public attention on the international policy co-ordination focused on fiscal stimulus, in the form of government deficits, and monetary stimulus, with interest rate cuts, these were supplemented by vital and underappreciated technical acts of co-operation behind the scenes. European, Japanese and Canadian banks, among others, borrow from capital markets at short-term maturities for worldwide lending in dollars. Yet these markets can freeze up suddenly, as happened in October 2008. Only the US Federal Reserve can act as the ultimate lender of last resort to the globalised dollar economy. Lipton warns it is unclear whether the Fed would again be able to extend $1 trillion (€875bn) of funding to fellow central banks, as it did a decade ago. He concludes the right lesson is for each country to be much more careful to sustain growth, limit vulnerabilities, and prepare for whatever may come. 2. Reduce the global economy's worrying dependence on debt The global financial crisis was essentially a debt crisis, and while its worst symptoms — falling economic growth and rising unemployment — have been banished, its essential cause — too much debt — has worsened. According to the Bank for International Settlements, total global debt — comprising government, corporate and household debt — was 179% of global GDP in 2007. By the end of 2017, it had reached 217% of GDP. This is dangerous because if someone who owes money goes bust, they may cause the bankruptcy of the person to whom they owe money. Increasing levels of debt add to the risk of financial contagion, mass bankruptcies and bank runs. Yet debt levels continue to rise as they provide an economic sugar high and allow people to avoid the reality that they may be living beyond their means. 3. Run a budget surplus The difficulty of states reducing their debt can be seen in the political challenge they face to run budget surpluses when times are good. With our economy operating at full tilt, and with the clear and present danger of a botched Brexit — and living off exceptional corporate tax receipts from the multinational sector — Ireland should be running a substantial budget deficit right now. That this isn't happening, even under supposedly super-conservative Paschal Donohoe, indicates the political challenge of running a surplus when there are increased demands for greater public spending. With the economy operating strongly, people should be able to save to insure themselves against the income shock that a renewed downturn may bring. Unfortunately, if the situation in America is any guide, this does not appear to be the case for most. Roughly 40% of Americans would not be able to deal with an unexpected $400 emergency expense, 69% have less than $1,000 in savings, and 34% have no savings at all. Should you maximise or minimise borrowing? This depends on the rate of return you believe you can get with borrowed funds. If you are paying a 4% rate of interest but the long-term value of the asset those borrowing are funding is 10%, then it makes sense to borrow. If, on the other hand, you have surplus cash sitting in a bank deposit where it is earning little or no interest, it would be logical to use some of the cash to reduce your debt and your annual interest expense. Should you lock in your interest expense for several years with a fixedrate mortgage? I think so, as I believe that inflation is more likely to rise than fall over the coming years and that interest rates are likely to move upwards with inflation. On top of that, the ECB's retreat from quantitative easing removes a factor that has been keeping interest rates at ultra-low levels. PS: A recurring story at this time of the year is the notion that the third Monday of January is Blue Monday, the most depressing day of the year. The belief is based on an equation that links weather, debt and other factors. This seems a bit farfetched. Tellingly, the Blue Monday meme was first propagated by a package holiday company, Sky Travel, that was hoping to boost sales of summer holidays. The empirical evidence simply doesn't support the notion that the third Monday in January is the most depressing day of the year — as far back as 1838, a higher incidence of suicide in spring and early summer was noted. In 1951, Swinscow showed the same pattern for UK suicides from 1921-48. A 1976 Ontario study found peaks of suicide and admissions for depression in spring and autumn. Meanwhile, a 2003 Australian study found that suicide levels were highest in summer. These studies all suggest ,if we take suicide statistics as our yardstick, that we are least happy in spring and summer. The science writer Ben Goldacre has written: "Making up stupid stuff about the most depressing day of the year doesn't help anyone, because bullshit presented as fact is simply disempowering." Unfortunately, we are a credulous species that likes hearing stories about how tough things are — and often believe in "facts" that are flat-out wrong. The Economist concluded that 'the euro has been an economic fiasco' CREDIT: Cormac Lucey
