 It looks like Philip Lane, the Central Bank of Ireland governor, is finally moving on. He is the sole nominee for the role of chief economist at the European Central Bank (ECB). So, unless some other country does a deal with the Germans and the French to insist that somebody else is appointed ahead of him, Prof Lane is pretty much a shoo-in. That's how Europe works, apparently. Lane was appointed governor in October 2015. For almost half of his unremarkable tenure, the incredibly smart Lane or his deputy have been linked to jobs elsewhere. Last year, he was the preferred candidate for ECB deputy governor, before ultimately losing out to a Spaniard. The focus then shifted to Sharon Donnery, Lane's deputy. She made the final two in the selection of a new head of the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), the ECB's banking regulator. She lost out to an Italian. The top floor of North Wall Quay was beginning to resemble the fall of Saigon. Lane's appointment is an outstanding personal achievement. The chief economist of the ECB is one of the most influential roles within the entire European Union. It is a position of genuine intellectual leadership. If confirmed, Harvard-educated Lane will join in May, a full five months before a successor to the current ECB president Mario Draghi is installed. According to insiders, the chief economist sets the tone of debate on ECB monetary policy. In the coming months, that debate promises to be fractious. The hawkish Jens Weidmann, head of the Bundesbank, has called for interest rates to rise, if only to leave some room to manoeuvre for action when the next recession arrives. It is a reasonable, if not very popular, argument. Weidmann was once seen as the most likely and widely feared of Draghi's potential successors. The eurozone's dominant economy has never held the ECB presidency. Yet the German chancellor Angela Merkel is likely to pass on the role in favour of securing the commission presidency. That's how Europe works, apparently. As a result, a couple of Finns, Olli Rehn and Erkki Liikannen, and a trio of French worthies, including the IMF boss Christine Lagarde, lead the early betting. Back home in Dublin, the government will choose the new Central Bank governor. Lane succeeded another Trinity economics professor, Patrick Honohan, and one presumes the academic well has now run dry. Donnery has marked herself out as an obvious candidate. She applied for the SSM job, rather than being a political nominee. Progressing so far in the competition, off her own bat, shows she is obviously extremely capable. She heads a European committee on non-performing loans, a problem that has not gone away, you know. An economist, Donnery has been at the Central Bank for the past 22 years. This is perhaps the only negative, alongside her poachability. A full decade after the crisis, it is time for a bit of longevity at the top. Two civil servants are also likely to enter the frame: Robert Watt, unlucky to lose out to Lane in 2015; and rising finance mandarin Derek Moran. Another candidate, spoken about in some circles, is the Ibec leader Danny McCoy. Yet it is a mark of our place in the world that the looming appointment in Frankfurt is likely to be of more import than the one in Dublin. All eyes will be on Lane's new boss, not his successor. PPB marches through Georgia It wasn't the Georgia on most people's minds. PaddyPowerBetfair (PPB) has opened a new frontier, acquiring Adjarabet, Georgia's biggest online gambling company. Adjarabet is based in Tbilisi, not Atlanta. PPB is not the first western European company to dip its toe in the market. The Swedish company Betsson and GVC, owner of Ladbrokes, have both bought in Georgia. Like PPB, they purchased 51% stakes in local operators. PPB is paying £101m (€115m) for its 51%, a higher multiple than GVC paid to acquire its stake in Crystalbet. GVC has also capped its buyout of the minority shareholder at €150m, while the PPB deal is a more open seven times earnings. In a market growing at 40% a year, that could end up as a big cheque. The two behemoths should kick lumps out of each other. Crystalbet is Georgia's biggest sport betting company, while Adjarabet is strong in casino gaming. PPB should beef up Adjarabet's sports betting capability, while GVC's strength is more in casino games. Promised land for Providence After many false dawns, Providence Resources has booked its rig for drilling at the Barryroe prospect off the Cork coast later this year. Chinese partner Apec is lending up to $250m (€218m) to complete the appraisal process on a non-recourse basis. The 200-day drilling programme will deliver results in 2020, a full eight years after the fanfare announcement of the discovery. With net cash on its balance sheet, and the Apec loan facility meeting the cost of drilling, long-suffering Providence shareholders can finally sit back and await the news from the deep. brian.carey@sunday-times.ie Donnery has marked herself out as an obvious successor CREDIT: Brian Carey
