 The February 16 presidential election fever has peaked with telling signs, writes Olawale Olaleye
One by one, the 2019 equation is beginning to assume more definitive shape. And the one beautiful element in this month’s presidential election is the choice of the candidates by the two leading parties – the opposition Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) and the ruling All Progressives Congress (APC).
The fact that they are both northerners of the Fulani extraction and devout Muslims is one combined factors that would temper tension and moderate passion, when finally a winner and a loser emerge.
It is no wonder, therefore, that at each of the rallies of the respective parties, they had matched each other crowd for crowd, albeit with differing issues on what should define the choice of the electorate. Also, for this same reasons, reports of violence especially, in the core north at any of the rallies of either parties have been practically non-existent.
This, of course, to a very large extent has informed the views in many quarters that regardless of whoever wins between the two candidates – Muhammadu Buhari and Atiku Abubakar – the likely resort to violence is very slim or nil. The assumption that it is still the turn of the north is not only active and prevalent, it has also made other candidates from other parts of the country appear like pretenders.
In fact, it was one reason Professor Jerry Ghana of the Social Democratic Party (SDP) allegedly challenged the emergence of Mr. Donald Duke as the candidate of the party, because according to him, the presidency had been zoned to the north and so, Duke, being a Southerner from Cross River State, could not be the candidate.
This was without recourse to the constitution of the land and forgetting that zoning is purely an arrangement within the political parties. Although an Abuja Appeal Court has reversed the situation and pronounced Duke the authentic SDP candidate, it does not appear yet that Gana would give in so easily.
With the campaigns in both parties peaking in the coming week, more so that the election is just a matter of days, the signs of who might get what votes and where are beginning to manifest themselves, in addition to the familiar antics that have dotted the turf. Indeed, it is going to be a very tight and tough contest like never seen before.
One of the interesting developments of last week, amid the campaigns, was the request by the PDP and the Coalition of United Political Parties (CUPP), asking for President Muhammadu Buhari to be disqualified on the account that he was no longer fit, mentally and physically to be president.
This also came at a time former President Olusegun Obasanjo vowed to use everything within his reach to save the country from the collapse the APC is about to plunge her into, adding that for reasons of capacity and effectiveness, his former deputy, Atiku Abubakar is by far a better candidate, although a choice between two evils.
What’s more, Atiku’s chances in the race received some boost in the week following his performance at The Candidates, a citizen’s debate platform put together by the Nigerian Television Authority. Buhari had earlier appeared on the same programme a couple of weeks ago and posted a performance that many thought was below expectations from an incumbent president. But Atiku did it in and left with high shoulders alongside his running mate, Peter Obi.
This is not to say that Atiku’s candidacy did not court a bit of controversy, when members of a prominent pan-Igbo group, Ohanaeze, disagreed over the endorsement allegedly extended to him. This is crucial, because the development claimed the body’s secretary-general, Uche Okwukwu, who was suspended for alleged anti-party and aligning with the APC.
Generally, the battle front is getting really hot and interesting ahead of the February 16 presidential poll and definitely dictating the likely direction in some of the states. To say that a majority of the states are at the mercy of the outcome of the presidential election, which comes first, is stating the obvious.
While it is true that some states have their future clearly cut out, the fact that what would obtain in many others would be dictated by the outcome of the first election is a no-brainer.
This is why a look at some of the key states with peculiar tendency is instructive. But then, these analyses are still subject to further changes in the days ahead, particularly in the week of the election. So, which are the states in the news last week and for what excuses?
