 VENEZUELA is in the grips of a Presidential crisis, with two politicians vying for power and countries around the world weighing in on the debate. But the corruption scale in a country torn apart has now been revealed in latest figures. EXCLUSIVE
Venezuela is in the midst of a major political crisis as countries around the globe fail to recognise Nicolas Maduro. The British Government was joined by Austria, The Netherlands, Portugal, Sweden, Denmark, France and Spain in recognising the leader of the opposition Juan Guaido. Maduro was proclaimed the winner of the 2018 presidential election but then stripped of his victory by the National Assembly of Venezuela who declared the results of the election invalid. Guaido was then declared interim president but the enveloping crisis iss prompting fears of World War 3 as Russia stays firm behind Maduro.
Related articles Venezuela is ‘disease threat to America’ as measles cases soar WW3 tensions ESCALATE as US hints at Venezuela military intervention
Britain, France, Germany and Spain announced their direct recognition of Guaido on Monday, assuming an eight-day deadline they set last Saturday for an election is not met.
Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro has dismissed the call as an unacceptable ultimatum.
Nicolas Maduro was first elected as Venezuela’s President in April 2013 and has largely relied on the military to maintain his power.
A 2014 Gallup poll found that 75 percent of Venezuelans believed corruption was widespread throughout the government, and corruption was one of the reasons given for both the 2014 and 2017 Venezuelan protests.
Read More: US v Venezuela: Trump’s plot to OUST Maduro and curb Russian influence
Venezuela CRISIS: How has Maduro impacted Venezuela during his presidency?
In the Americas, Venezuela is the bottom of Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index.
Venezuela was graded 18/100 “reflecting systemic and persistent corruption across the country”.
Whilst Canada tops the Corruption Perceptions Index, with 81/100 and the USA follows on 71/80.
The reason for low scores across Venezuela and indeed much of the Americas is there is a rise in some leaders and leadership styles which favour these tactics:
an undermining of free and independent media, especially when coverage challenges leaders’ messaginga silencing and control of civil society and international organisationsan increase in voter suppression and disenfranchisementan increase in anti-immigrant, anti-LGBT, anti-indigenous and racist languagea rise in public promises for simplistic and “strong hand” approaches to solving deep-rooted and complex societal problems, including corruptionan interference with or blunt use of national institutions to weaken the system of checks and balances and increase executive poweran increase in conflicts of interest and private influence
Related articles Venezuela CRISIS latest: Thousands of demonstrators line the streets Venezuela CRISIS: Locals sell HAIR and jewellery as economy in TURM...
Maduro was voted Person of the Year in 2016 by the Organised Crime and Corruption Reporting Project for being “the individual who has done the most in the world to advance organised criminal activity and corruption".
The OCCRP stated they “chose Maduro for the global award on the strength of his corrupt and oppressive reign, so rife with mismanagement that citizens of his oil-rich nation are literally starving and begging for medicines”.
Maduro and his family have been accused of stealing millions of dollars from the government to fund backing which keeps his power in Venezuela.
The OCCRP editor and one of the judges for the Person of the Year award Drew Sullivan said in 2016: “It’s been a big year for Maduro.
“I think this year has been the tipping point and his negligence, incompetence and corruption are the cause.
Venezuela CRISIS: Venezuela is the most corrupt country in the Americas
“When a country’s leader can watch his people starve and still oversee a government stealing $70 billion a year all while his family deals drugs, it’s a special kind of evil. He deserves this prize.”
Commenting on the situation in Venezuela, Fernando Freijedo, an analyst at The Economist Intelligence Unit told Express.co.uk:
“As of the moment of writing, neither the Venezuelan government nor PDVSA has responded beyond calling the US announcements part of an attempted coup.
“The fact that there has been such a delay in announcing palliative measures is both typical of the Maduro's regime incompetence and a bad sign for the regime's internal stability.
“The gamble is a bold one as the US has played its strongest card and is now seemingly out of non-military options on Venezuela.
Venezuela CRISIS: Maduro was voted Person of the Year for his corruption in 2016
“We had expected the US to work its way up to sanctions as a form of building pressure within the regime. Mr Bolton once again said, in reference to military intervention, that "all options are on the table".
“However, the use of military force continues to seem unlikely as it would almost surely come with costs in terms of legitimacy for the US and the opposition.
“Russia, but more importantly China, remain wildcards. Both countries could potentially offer loans, and trade opportunities to replace those blocked by the US's actions."
However, Mr Freijedo said he does "not expect either country to fully commit to prop-up the Maduro regime.”
Venezuela CRISIS: Venezuela's GDP is suffering and projected to reach lower than its peers
This is because: “We see China unwilling to heavily bet against the US and risk souring relations in the midst of trade negotiations. Similarly, we see Russia as more interested in dealing with its own sanctions and, unlike China, financially unable to bankroll the Venezuelan regime.
“There have been no high-ranking defections inside of Venezuela. However, there are numerous anecdotal reports that the rank-and-file and lower-level officers in both armed forces and the gendarmerie are unhappy at the deteriorating living conditions and increasingly reticent to repress the citizenry.
“This breakdown in command, coupled with the loss of revenue from exports, is the opposition's main hopes of inciting a fracture inside the regime.
“The Venezuelan political situation is at a crucial stage. The opposition has made significant advances in key areas needed to maximise its chances of fracturing the regime. The coming days, with the regime's response and the opposition's show of public support, will show if the regime's internal stability will hold.“
