 For years we complained about the unrealistic high prices being paid for Sydney houses. Now prices are stable or falling buyers should be rejoicing. Instead the economists tell us it's bad news ("Analysts fear house price fallout", February 2-3). Before the term "housing market" was created people bought houses to live in, raise a family. Now we buy and sell houses to make money. It's good news if you can now afford a place to live in; tough luck if you are a profit seeker.
Bill DunLany, Hunters Hill
I have always been confused by the pronouncements of economists, but now I am more puzzled than ever ("Property owners fear staying in the market", February 2-3). All levels of government, federal, state and local, have adopted policies "to make housing more affordable". Now that it is actually becoming more affordable, we are told "Australia's top economists have concerns about the potential damage this will do to the economy".
John Roseth, Mosman
"Fear of Not Getting Out": when will the realisation dawn? If house prices are falling and you are a genuine home owner looking to change your home, it really makes no difference. If your house price has gone down so has the price on your next property. If you are speculating on a capital gain it is a different story.
Judith Leslie, Bulga
Pokies pain
That the Australian Hotels Association is one of the biggest political donors comes as no surprise ("Politicians hit gambling donations jackpot as pokies contributions soar", February 2-3). This organisation promotes the evils of poker machines and was a key player and advocate for the recent reductions in penalty rates. The AHA is far from being a "community-focused organisation" as it purports to be. The clubs it represents take millions of dollars from those who can least afford it whilst having one of the highest levels of insecure employment. It seems obvious that only politicians benefit from the activities of the AHA and this needs to stop.
Tony Heathwood, Kiama
We do not allow advertising of gambling, tobacco or alcohol in the media in any form because of the proven harm they do to our physical, mental, material and moral wellbeing. It should be likewise prohibited for any political party to receive donations or in any way profit from the companies or lobby groups associated with these things. The upcoming political campaign will be sickening enough without the knowledge that it is funded by destructive businesses like these.
Sally Morris, Leichhardt
I'll bet neither major party does anything about reducing the harm from poker machines ("Labor's dirty little pokie secret (and it's brave Tassie rebels", February 2-3). They're winning too much revenue despite the fact the rest of us are losing big time!
Moya Gibb Smith, Paddington
Car death concern
The sympathetic tone and soft sentence of the brief article about the Uber driver who accelerated as his passenger was leaving the car is typically representative of the tolerance, even acceptance, we have to death by car ("'Haunted' driver will not face jail", February 2-3). The driver, a person who carries passengers for commercial benefit, was more focused on the green traffic light than the customer climbing out of his car among traffic. He should be utterly traumatised. And while prison isn't necessarily the place for people who kill by car, we do need to recognise that our acceptance of death by car is enormous.
Brigid Kelly, Glebe
Electric buses are better
It's just as well the tree didn't fall across tram lines ("Extremely lucky to be alive", Sun-Herald, February 3).
"Buses were diverted via Margaret Street, Kent Street and Erskine Street to return to York Street and were missing stops along York Street at Wynyard." Where would the tram have gone? Nowhere.
We would be better off with electric buses, as being trialled in the Illawarra and recently praised by Transport Minister Constance.
Rob Domone, Denistone
Political donations
Australia is an immigrant country and politicians are subjected to lobbying from community, business and political groups linked or not linked to a foreign government ("Abbott rues dinner with China 'influence pedlars"', February 2-3). Every country has an agenda and it is up to our government to remain independent despite lobbying. The media reporting is biased, sensational and discriminatory; and appeared polarised by geopolitics. Political donations are labelled sinister because of a polarised political view.
Both major parties accept donations in a level playing field where the law applies to all. The Foreign Interference Transparency Scheme Act 2018 applies to all. This only applies to lobbying. To be really transparent, the bill should be extended to cover the donor, the amount and to which political party.
The general philosophy is lobby all you like with whatever financial means but we are protected by "Transparency Bills" and the faith in our politicians to have integrity and making decisions in our national interests. If that was the case, former PM Abbott wouldn't have to say, "I didn't know them."
Anthony Pun, Kingsgrove
Nauru children
I should've cheered at the news ("All refugee children off Nauru within days", Sun-Herald, February 3). But, I couldn't. I felt sick to the stomach to think these last few children and their families were most likely held over for electioneering. It seems Scott Morrison has more to say about Bill Shorten and border control. Oh, dear. Trump's apprentice was more concerned about fear-mongering than the children on Nauru. Sad.
Caroline Butt, Bensville
Different interpretations
There is one quite notable difference between the Bible and the Koran on the point of violence (Letters, February 2-3).
The message of the Koran will never be changed. Unlike nearly all of the Old Testament verses of violence, the verses of violence in the Koran are mostly open ended, meaning that they are not restrained by the historical context of the surrounding text as in the Bible.
They are part of the eternal, unchanging word of Allah.
Richard Merrell, Penrith
