 The quest for a lower-carbon environment isn’t a communist plot to destroy capitalism
Commentators who rail against the looming transition to a low-carbon economy tend to rely on two arguments: first, the science is flawed; second, the economy will be ruined. These arguments are deployed against various villains, including renewable electricity, house insulation, carbon taxes and emissions trading.
So let’s examine the objections, grounded in economics.
On this page last month, Ian Plimer set an example: “Activists … are setting the scene for economic suicide” and the climate consensus is “a fraud that has already cost the community hundreds of billions of dollars”. Responses by others in various blogs followed on cue: “Taxes impose deadweight losses on the economy”, “advocating the economic suicide of the West”, “greenies advocate inefficiency” and “the quasi-religious crusade by communist green zealots to use climate policy to destroy capitalism”. Numerous politicians have made similar extremist claims.
These are curious arguments when advanced by anyone who believes in free markets, as so many of the columnists, letter writers and politicians who oppose climate action claim to do. The economic logic underpinning them is as woeful as the scientific.
Almost every introductory textbook to economics identifies the ability of markets to co-ordinate between producers and consumers as the source of markets’ superiority over central planning as a method of organising an economy. By iteratively adjusting supply and demand through the medium of price signals that travel up and down supply chains, producers deliver goods and services matched in quantity and quality with consumers’ needs or wants.
When goods and services turn up in the marketplace, the price is the result of all costs of input, fixed and variable.
By the way, it is not really true that this co-ordination proceeds magically by an invisible hand without central planning. Almost every large corporation operates under a hierarchical structure with some form of business planning.
And, further, no modern economy could function without extensive central planning of infrastructure by governments.
Those who argue the transition to a low-carbon economy will destroy it forget there is nothing absolute about today’s mix of components or their prices.
Indeed, economists recognise change is inevitable and terms such as “technological disruption” and “creative destruction” explain that, as circumstances evolve, some companies will fail, some new enterprises will start up, some workers will be left redundant and various new goods and services will arise.
It is perfectly plausible to argue that certain industries or factories at certain locations, such as coal-fired generation in the Latrobe Valley, will be laid to waste, but that won’t necessarily be a cost to the economy as a whole, as the money that would have been spent there will turn up somewhere else.
There is a widely recognised baseline problem in economics: market transactions alone cannot explain the present economic canvas, only build on the previous.
Markets do not tend to some magical state. There is no ideal state, just exchange. There is nothing necessarily optimal about today’s distribution of economic activity between industries, regional locations, workers and capital or any other axis of analysis.
The 2011 carbon price was an attempt to use the co-ordinating power of markets to steer the economy in a less carbon-intensive direction. Nothing radical about that: it was a thoroughly orthodox economic tool.
Market instruments used this way are largely contractual and voluntary — as opposed to more coercive instruments of regulation. After the levy was abolished in 2014, the government of the day extracted revenue from taxpayers to finance an Emissions Reduction Fund, then used central planning to disburse the largesse to fortunate businesses and individuals.
The net effect of this “command-and-control” procedure was to avoid charging the costs of the pollution to its source. This turns on its head the accusation taxpayers are subsidising the cost of solar installations. In fact, homeowners who install panels on their roofs are paying twice for their civic duty of enlarging the ­nation’s generating capacity.
There is of course a limitation in the above analysis: the Australian economy is not self-contained. Outflows across national borders can suck financial payments away from Australia and into the hands of foreign investors or exporters, disrupting the circularity that would otherwise mean every Australian’s cost would be to some other Australian’s benefit.
There is a plausible argument that payments for international carbon credits will constitute a net cost to Australia without the benefit of traceable environmental performance. Foreign trade and investment is, however, a construct of policy and can be either encouraged or throttled by policy interventions. Australia’s choice since 1983 to open its markets to foreign transactions was a deliberate strategy and in principle can be reversed or made conditional.
In any case, carbon credits are an invention of economists, not scientists. The strongest coherent critiques of free trade have come from the environmental movement and fellow travellers on the progressive side of politics.
Climate contrarians should note I am not arguing renewable generation is the solution to our or the world’s energy challenges. It is not yet pro­ven that a modern industrial eco­nomy can be powered by assem­bling dispersed forms of energy such as sunlight and wind in place of concentrated forms like coal and oil.
Technology will, however, drive some form of substitution. In the inevitable transition, the power of markets to adjust supply and demand according to changing taxes, subsidies, regulations, input costs and community expectations will be pivotal to the birth of, optimistically, a new and more sustainable economy that will better serve the human population.Geoff Edwards is president of the Royal Society of Queensland. This article does not necessarily represent the views of all members.
