 London
ECONOMISTS at Ifo Institute, a leading German economic think-tank, have proposed a canny plan to end the Brexit deadlock: open the door to a flexible Brexit deal that is acceptable to both the UK Parliament and the European Union (EU).
The model would scrap the contentious "backstop provision" in the current withdrawal agreement. Instead, the UK would delegate all trade policy in goods to a newly-created European Customs Association (ECA).
The EU would also be a member of the ECA. Crucially, the UK would have the same voting rights in the ECA as the 27 member states of the EU.
The ECA would also cover trade policy, such as tariffs, quotas and rules of origin.
Since both the UK and Ireland would be members of the ECA, there would be no need for customs barriers on the Irish border.
The ECA would not cover trade in services, intellectual property, direct foreign investment, audiovisual and cultural services, and social, educational and health services.
Gabriel Felbermayr and Clemens Fuest of the Ifo Institute are the lead authors of the plan which is backed by other German and European academic institutions.
They suggested a minimum three-month extension to the March 29 UK withdrawal date from the EU to establish the ECA.
In particular, they appealed to EU leaders and negotiators to be far more flexible with British Prime Minister Theresa May, who is struggling to get Parliament to accept her Brexit deal.
"The nearer the deadline, the better the chances for a last-minute compromise. Yet this is a very dangerous game, both for the UK and for EU," the proponents of the ECA plan said.
"Recognising that a hard Brexit is in no one's interest and that it would cause irreparable political as well as economic damage, we call both on the UK government and the EU Commission to rethink their 'red lines' and return to the negotiation table."
The German economists issued a veiled criticism against EU inflexibility.
"Since 2000, the United Kingdom paid a net contribution to the EU budget of £76 billion (S$118 billion)," they noted. "One may argue that this fact alone merits a fair treatment of the second-largest European economy.
"Under the proposed new arrangement there would be no passive rule-taking but instead a continuing active involvement of the UK in European trade policy, with high mutual benefits."
So far, there has been no response to the plan from either Brussels or the UK government.
Weakness in the European economies, however, has concentrated minds. Italy is officially in recession as its economy contracted in the final quarters of 2018.
In the three months ended September, Germany's economy contracted. The government has downgraded growth forecasts to only one per cent in 2019, but some independent forecasters expect recession.
The eurozone's economy grew by only 0.2 per cent in the final quarter of 2018, down from 0.4 per cent in the previous three months. This is the lowest growth in four years for eurozone indebted nations that have high unemployment.
There are worries on both sides of the channel that if Brexit takes place with no deal, there could be a serious shock that would worsen economic weakness.
Alexander Von Schoenburg, editor-at-large of Bild, Germany's major tabloid said: "What is needed is a man or woman to stand up to the bureaucratic machine of Brussels... We need someone who can remind us of our bounden duty and enable the UK to leave without punishing it."
Mrs May, who is expected to return to Europe this week, stated in an article for The Telegraph: "When I return to Brussels, I will be battling for Britain and Northern Ireland. I will be armed with a fresh mandate, new ideas and a renewed determination to agree (to) a pragmatic solution that delivers the Brexit the British people voted for, while ensuring there is no hard border between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland. That is what Parliament instructed me to do."
