 Changes to emissions standards for vehicles following the "dieselgate" scandal have had a profound impact on the European car industry.
Germany's Bundesbank blamed the shift in regulation for a marked slowdown last year that caused the country's economy to shrink by 0.2pc in the third quarter. While it is unlikely that diesel's woes were the sole cause for the German slowdown, the gear shift in car manufacturing in the wake of new emissions regulations has been considerable.
These issues are once again in the spotlight after Nissan said it would not build its most-commonly diesel-powered X-Trail model at the company’s Sunderland plant .
Following the revelation that Volkswagen had installed “defeat devices” in its vehicles to rig emissions tests, there has been a pan-European crackdown on car pollution. This has combined with a slowdown in consumer demand for cars in China, one of the EU’s most important export markets.
The US group that uncovered dieselgate, the International Council on Clean Transportation, went on to test a wide range of cars from other manufacturers and found that even the newest models failed to meet EU emissions rules.
This study played a part in the decision by some big German cities to ban diesel vehicles altogether and pushed new regulations to the top of the EU’s political agenda.
A new UK testing regime was set up by the Department for Transport and new rules on vehicle emissions were formulated in Brussels.
Eurozone car production
Those rules came into force in September, giving manufacturers little time to prepare. This lead to bottlenecks at testing centres and production delays across the EU, according to Capital Economics.
So large were the discounts being offered on cars ahead of the new emissions regimes that it defied seasonal trends in data in the UK and gave August’s GDP figures an unusual boost as consumers cashed in .
While the emissions scandal has considerably hastened the demise of diesel car production, its fate was already sealed.
Tackling air pollution is now a top priority in China and commitments to meet cleaner air targets and wider climate goals across western governments are gathering pace. Combined with the rise of hybrid and battery technology, diesel was already becoming a less attractive area for manufacturing investment.
Patrick Hummel of Swiss bank UBS says: “We have already seen a significant drop in the diesel share in Europe. A couple of years ago every second car sold in Europe was diesel. Now that’s more like a third and we definitely don’t see any potential recovery to levels of the past.”
The wave of opposition following dieselgate can shoulder much of the blame, according to Mr Hummel. There has also been a significant rise in costs as manufacturers try to make new diesel models meet emissions standards, eating into profit margins.
As electric cars become more reliable and can travel for longer distances thanks to better batteries, diesel has become less attractive for consumers looking for cheap running costs.
“The consumer choice for diesel cars on the market is already shrinking. Travel bans [for diesels] in an increasing number of German cities are certainly adding to consumers’ fears over the vehicles,” Mr Hummel adds.
Brexit | What next?
He believes diesel sales will continue to decline but will not “fall off a cliff” as corporate fleets will still offer some scope for sales in the the medium term, Hummel explains. Nevertheless, the writing is on the wall for diesel.
Its demise does not manage to explain all of the fall in investment in UK car manufacturing, which nearly halved last year to £588m.
Manufacturers may be reluctant to invest in diesel car production in general terms, but economists agree that some factors have made the UK less attractive as an investment destination at the moment.
Most obvious is the political uncertainty over Brexit and particularly how a deal might affect the "just-in-time" production models that manufacturers rely on. These demand near-zero friction for parts moving back and forward with the continent.
Complex rules of origin that demand a set amount of a product must derive for a certain location to benefit from the tariff reduction or exemption granted under a trade deal are another major cause for concern. The likely agreement on these issues remains uncertain, as they too depend on the future trading relationship between the UK and EU.
Significantly, a deal struck between the EU and Japan, one of the biggest free trade agreements in the world, might also be partly to blame for the decline of UK diesel car production. Within seven years, tariffs on exports of cars from Japan to the EU will be phased out to reach zero. Investing in Japan is now "much more attractive", says David Owens of Jefferies says.
Diesel’s impending death is part of a far wider decline of the heavily polluting car. Nissan's decision not to build the X-trail in the UK may be a symptom of that problem.
However, Nissan’s move not to invest or cut back on UK manufacturing capacity is not an isolated case. Airbus has put out increasingly shrill warnings about future investment in UK operations if there is a “no deal” Brexit outcome. Rolls-Royce has relocated certification of jet engines from Derby to Germany to avoid regulatory headaches post-Brexit, while Philips will stop manufacturing in the UK altogether.
Diesel car-making is suffering death by margin and regulation entirely separate to the Brexit process, but prolonged political uncertainty could severely hurt UK manufacturing more broadly, economists say.
Owens adds: “The UK will need to move quickly to make sure it doesn’t lose its edge in other areas. As a provider of intellectual property [innovation in areas such as car manufacturing] and capital, centres like Warwick, Lancaster and Sussex must not be allowed to fall off a cliff.”
