 ECONOMIST and author Gerard Lyons claimed that despite Brexit uncertainty the UK has an opportunity to improve the manufacturing industry once Britain has left the European Union.
Nissan’s announcement they will not be building their X-Trail 4x4 in their Sunderland factory due to Brexit uncertainty has fuelled the debate on the impact Brexit is having on industries. Economist and author Gerard Lyons claimed after the UK leaves the EU, the British car and manufacturing industry has an opportunity to improve. During an interview on Sky News, he said: “Bringing it back to Nissan and Sunderland. On the positive side Sunderland is an incredibly productive factory and if you look at the top 10 sales of Nissan in terms of the vehicles, I think about a quarter of the top 10 output comes from Sunderland itself.
Related articles Lord Adonis interrupted during TENSE grilling over second Brexit vote Rees-Mogg outlines how UK could have secured a BETTER Brexit deal
“So there are still a lot of positives about the current situation in Sunderland.
“Obviously it is disappointing that new investment is not coming to the UK.
“What we really need to do in terms of Brexit is not only have a quick decision regarding our future relationship with the EU.
“But when it comes to UK manufacturing post-Brexit, we need to do be doing lots of things to boost the attractiveness of investment, boosting innovation and also infrastructure spending across the UK.
Gerard Lyons has said post-Brexit the UK can improve its car manufacturing industry
“So there are lots of things I think we will be better able to do to aid UK manufacturing once we leave the EU.
“But clearly the uncertainty ahead of leaving, will not help firms in making their business decisions.”
The economist and author also touched on two factors he believes also impacted Nissan's decision to change manufacturing location for the X-Trail 4x4.
The car giant Nissan announced over the weekend that it would be building its X-Trail 4x4 in Japan instead of its Sunderland plant and attributed “Brexit uncertainty” as the reason.
However, some Brexiteers have insisted that this is not the full reason for the company’s decision.
Mr Lyons also said in the interview: “I think the two key factors looking at the detail that explained the decision.
“Where first the collapse in the demand for diesel.
“And second which should not be overlooked is the new EU Japan trade deal that came into effect last week.
“This means that in seven years time tariffs on autos are completely eliminated.”
