 ITALY has fallen back into recession with its economy shrinking by 0.2% in the last quarter, causing economists such as Roger Bootle to suggest that it may default or exit from the euro.
Mr Bootle also made a worrying prediction for the EU economy as a whole. He said: “As and when Italy finally blows up this will cause both a banking crisis that will shake the European economy and a political crisis that will rock the EU to its foundations.” It is now the third time Italy has fallen into recession in a decade. There has been a weakening of growth rates across the eurozone, which led to the EU increasing its GDP by only 0.2% in the final three months of 2018.
Related articles EU funds ‘going to MAFIA’: Park leader claims £2.6BN stolen by mob Eurozone CRISIS: Euro 'staring over the precipice of a recession'
In 1987 Italy’s GDP even briefly overtook the UK’s but it subsequently dropped down the international league tables so that by the time the euro was formed in 1999 it was already a weak performer.
But the euro has made matters worse, according to Mr Bootle.
Since its formation, Italy has grown by only 9 percent.
Mr Bootle contrasts this with the UK’s performance when he states: “By contrast, the UK, self-excluded from the benefits of the single currency, has grown by 44 percent.”
READ MORE: END OF EU: 'Religious' ideologue and euro threaten Juncker's dream
Giuseppe Conte Italian Prime Minister
Matteo Salvini
He added: “Italian 10-year bond yields are about 2.6 percent above their German equivalents, compared to 1.2 percent before the current government was formed.
“Unless Italy manages to conjure up a sustained growth spurt, then the eventual result will be a default, an exit from the euro, or both.”
Mr Bootle gave some historical context to the present economic downcast.
He details that, “throughout Italy’s 20 years in the euro, the political system has been in a mess.
Mr Salvini is the leader of the Lega Party
“Brussels called the shots and the Italian establishment felt in no position to challenge it.
“Bear in mind that not only was Italy a founding member of both the EU and the euro, but for a long time the Italian public was particularly enthusiastic about the EU.
"And its plans for integration."
“Resentment of the EU is a relatively new phenomenon.”
