 NISSAN’s decision to scrap plans to build its new X-Trail SUV in Britain were nothing to do with Brexit, but rather the result of a realisation that there was no appetite in Europe for a large, diesel-powdered vehicle, a senior economist has said.
Production of the XTrail has been moved from Sunderland to Japan
The Japanese carmaker announced yesterday the vehicle would be built solely in Japan, going back on a pledge made two years ago which would have seen it produced at the company’s plant in Sunderland in the North East. A letter leaked to the Financial Times suggested Britain promised £80million in support to Nissan as part of a major investment in the plant just four months after the Brexit vote. But Julian Jessop, an economics Fellow at the Institute for Economic Affairs, said the company was nevertheless using Brexit as a convenient excuse.
Related articles Lord Jones utterly destroys 'establishment ELITE' sabotaging Brexit Economist claims UK auto-industry will be BETTER off after LEAVING EU
He said: “The fact is there is no business case for a diesel car like this to be produced in Britain, or anywhere in the EU.
“There just is not the appetite for them here - it was not going to sell well.
“I don’t think Nissan changed their mind because of Brexit.
“Clearly it is bad news for Sunderland but on the other hand they are committed to building plenty of other vehicles there - the Qashqai for example.
“Of course, it’s going to be connected with Brexit because it is so close and there’s no doubt businesses are unhappy about the ongoing delays and uncertainty and admittedly the timing is unfortunate.
“But I think rather than being anything to do with Brexit, this is about a very specific problem to do with this model.”
Nissan cut hundreds of jobs in Sunderland factory last year as output fell by 11 percent, hit by levies and crackdowns on diesel vehicles.
Explaining Nissan’s decision yesterday, Europe Chairman Gianluca de Ficchy said: "Nissan has increased its investments in new powertrains and technology for its future European vehicles.
Related articles Crystal Palace Chairman takes BRUTAL swipe at Brexit Project Fear Nissan risks losing £60m Brexit sweetener after it cancels expansion
Nissan had originally planned to build the cars at its Sunderland plant
"Therefore the company has decided to optimise its investments in Europe by consolidating X-Trail production in Kyushu.
"While we have taken this decision for business reasons, the continued uncertainty around the UK's future relationship with the EU is not helping companies like ours to plan for the future.”
The new X-Trail could have created hundreds of jobs.
The carmaker's planned investment in the next-generation Juke and Qashqai models, which was also announced in 2016, was unaffected, the firm said on Sunday.
The timing of the announcement comes just two days after an EU-Japan free trade agreement kicked in, which includes the European Union's commitment to removing tariffs of 10 percent on imported Japanese cars.
A letter from Greg Clarke to the company was published by the FT today
Many Japanese companies had long seen Britain as the gateway into Europe, after being encouraged to open factories in the country by former prime minister Margaret Thatcher but Brexit has thrown that into doubt, prompting consternation in Tokyo.
Sunday's announcement also comes as the firm continues to deal with the fallout from the arrest of its former boss Carlos Ghosn, which has clouded the outlook for the automaking alliance betweenNissan, Renault and Mitsubishi.
The FT quoted from a letter sent by business minister Greg Clark to then-Nissan boss Carlos Ghosn in which he promises to protect the car sector as Britain leaves the European Union.
The letter said: “It will be a critical priority of our negotiations to support UK car manufacturers, and ensure their ability to export to and from the EU is not adversely affected by the UK's future relationship with the EU.
"In any circumstance, the government will ensure that the UK continues to be one of the most competitive locations for automotive and other advanced manufacturing within Europe and globally, including sites such as Sunderland."
