 There are signs the house price slump in Sydney and Melbourne is spilling over into the broader economy after a sharp fall in council approvals to build new apartments and houses.
The decline was led by units and apartments - new permits granted to build that style of housing plummeted by 18.8 per cent in December to be down 38 per cent compared with a year earlier.
That helped drag the national figure for dwelling approvals to a five-and-half-year low foreshadowing softer conditions in the construction sector.
The Australian dollar dipped after the figures were released by the Bureau of Statistics.
Westpac senior economist Matthew Hassan said falling house prices had been a factor in the decline in building approvals and it was now clear dwelling investment would detract from Australia's economic growth in 2019.
"What's happening in housing will clearly have an effect on the wider economy this year," he said.
Sydney's median house price fell by 9.9 per cent in 2018 according to the Domain House Price Report, while Melbourne's median house price was down more than 8 per cent.
Dwelling approvals have now fallen for three months in a row in NSW and are down by 27 per cent in trend terms compared with a year ago.
Last financial year construction was the third biggest industry in Sydney, making up about 7 per cent of the city's output so a slowdown in the home building sector is likely to hamper the economy.
Housing Industry Association economist Tim Reardon said the figures showed a slowdown in building activity accelerated towards the end of last year. "The boom in approvals of apartments is now over," he said.
"Apartment approvals averaged almost 30,000 per quarter for the three years of 2015-17, in stark contrast to the 17,778 record for this December quarter."
Mr Reardon said other factors contributed to the slump in approvals in addition to falling house prices. This included "punitive rates of tax on foreign investors", a record supply of new apartments and tighter lending conditions. "HIA research has found that the time taken to gain approval for a loan to build a new home has blown out from around two weeks to more than two months," he said. "Policy makers and lenders alike need to be cognisant that ordinary home buyers are now facing blowouts in loan processing times and also much greater rates of flat-out loan rejection."
The NSW government's December budget review said falling house prices and lower housing turnover were "expected to have only a limited impact on dwelling construction activity in the next two years". But economists said the fall in housing approvals in the past few months had been more than expected.
