 The apartment building boom is collapsing rapidly, threatening the optimistic outlook for the economy maintained by both Treasury and the Reserve Bank.
The number of new apartments in projects approved by local councils dropped 18.8 per cent in December and, following a similar fall in November, is at its lowest level since 2012.
“The drag on the economy from weaker residential construction activity looks set to be bigger than most economic commentators and policymakers envisaged,” Commonwealth Bank economist Gareth Aird said.
In Victoria, the number of apartments in high-rise projects approved in the last three months of the year was down 70 per cent from a year earlier, while there was a 35 per cent drop in NSW.
The Reserve Bank board meets today for the first time this year and will consider new forecasts prepared by bank staff that are expected to show only a modest downgrade of its last set of forecasts, which showed the economy growing 3.25 per cent this year and next.
The Reserve Bank and Treasury had assumed there would be only a small downturn in housing construction. The Reserve Bank’s November economic update said the decline would be “gradual” while Treasury’s budget review, released before Christmas, predicted a 1 per cent rise in housing investment this year followed by a small 4 per cent dip next year.
Westpac senior economist Matthew Hassan said the Reserve Bank would need to “materially lower the near term outlook for dwelling investment”, which he said would be a negative force in the economy, quite apart from any effect that falling house prices may have on consumer spending.
The weakness has extended to developers of detached housing, where the number of dwellings approved is down 11.1 per cent from a year ago, and to the commercial building sector where the value of new projects signed off by councils in the final three months of the year was 15.2 per cent below the level of a year earlier.
But it is the dramatic fall in apartment approvals that is forcing a reassessment of the outlook for the construction industry. The number of apartments in projects presented for approval can vary substantially from month to month, but the Housing Industry Association says the 17,800 apartments approved in the last three months of the year compares with a quarterly average of 30,000 over the three years to 2017.
HIA principal economist Tim Reardon said that while a downturn had long been expected, there was now a danger it would “develop more quickly and strongly than expected”.
Mr Reardon said banks and regulators were partly to blame for the severity of the downturn.
“The credit squeeze impacting the market at the moment has ­accelerated the slowdown in approvals,” he said.
“HIA research found the time taken to gain approval for a loan to build a new home has blown out from about two weeks to more than two months.” The difficulty in obtaining credit has compounded the effect of a record apartment supply, falling house prices and punitive rates of tax on foreign investors. Mr Reardon said the fall in approvals would be followed by slower building activity later this year.
It adds to a series of reports suggesting the economy lost ­momentum in the final months of 2018, including weaker business conditions and consumer confidence. ANZ’s monthly count of job advertisements, released yesterday, showed the first decline since April 2015.
ANZ head of Australian economics David Plank said it was not surprising to see the loss of economic momentum reflected in employment advertising, and said it would eventually show up in weaker hiring. He said job advertisements were still quite high, as was the Australian Bureau of Statistics report on job vacancies.Economists expect the Reserve Bank to stick to its long-held view that the next move for interest rates will be an increase, ­although it may give greater emphasis to risks of slower global and domestic economic growth.
