 This might be about as busy as the New Zealand construction industry gets, economists say.
There were 32,996 new homes consented in the year to December, and the number of consents that went to central government agencies hit a 40-year high.
Those departments, including Housing New Zealand, were responsible for 1999 new home consents in 2019, the highest number since 2105 in November 1978.
Partnerships between the government and private developers to build new homes might not be reflected in those numbers as the results depend on who was listed as the owner on the consent form.
Townhouses, flats, and units accounted for almost half of the new homes consented to central government in 2018.
In comparison, of all new homes consented only a fifth were townhouses, flats, and units.
ASB economist Jane Turner said consents finished the year almost 10 per cent up on the previous year.
"Residential dwelling consents lifted strongly over the past few years and are likely close to a peak as the construction industry struggles with capacity constraints," she said.
"In 2018, Auckland consents reached the highest level since the 1970s while Wellington recorded the highest number of consents since regional records begun in 1991. Nonetheless, we expect residential construction activity to remain at high levels over 2019."
She said continued strength in the Wellington and regional housing markets showed the increase in construction activity had not been enough to tackle housing shortages there.
Economist Cameron Bagrie said the country had been "bobbing around a peak" of consents for a while.
But the building sector was facing credit, capacity and cost constraints, he said.
Demand was still there, thanks to population growth, rising incomes, low unemployment and low interest rates.
"But those constraints are material. Costs are moving up and we're seeing Auckland house prices drop. That signals margin issues for developers."
CAPTION:
There were 33,996 new homes consented for in the year ended in December. LIBBY WILSON/STUFF
