 Britain’s long economic recovery could be at an end as foreign demand slumped last month, neighbours in the eurozone flirted with recession, and the UK's hiring spree faltered.
Businesses grew at the slowest pace since the wake of the EU referendum in 2016, blaming uncertainty over Brexit as a key factor holding back demand.
New orders dropped for the first time in more than two years. As a result employment may have fallen from recent record highs with businesses increasingly choosing not to replace staff who leave.
The purchasing managers’ index (PMI), an influential survey of the private sector compiled by IHS Markit and the Chartered Institute of Procurement and Supply, fell to 50.3 last month.
Any score of above 50 indicates growth, so this shows business activity barely budged in January.
It is down from 51.4 in December and from 53.4 a year ago.
The dominant services sector joined manufacturing and construction companies in reporting lower growth, getting the economy off to a weak start for the year.
“The last three months have seen the economy slip into its weakest growth spell for six years, and indicate that GDP likely stagnated at the start of 2019 after eking out modest growth of just 0.1pc in the fourth quarter,” said Chris Williamson, IHS Markit’s chief business economist.
“With the exception of July 2016, when demand contracted briefly following the surprise Brexit vote, service providers suffered the largest drop in new business since April 2009 as customers tightened their belts.”
Businesses do show some optimism in the survey, suggesting conditions could improve later in the year.
The index for expectations of future output rose to 62.1, edging up from 61.6 in December.
But economists fear that growth will struggle to rebound when the eurozone is also performing poorly, depriving British businesses of important export demand.
France’s PMI fell further into the red at 48.2, its lowest in more than five years.
That is even worse than the 48.8 recorded in recession-struck Italy.
However Germany’s 52.1, Ireland’s 53.3 and Spain’s 54.5 indicate other parts of the currency area are still achieving growth.
The spillover impact on the UK combined with domestic political uncertainty means economists expect the Bank of England to hold off on any firm decisions on interest rates at this Thursday’s monetary policy meeting.
“There is no masking the fact that this is a seriously disappointing report on the UK economy,” said Howard Archer, chief economic advisor to the EY Item Club.
“The weakened set of January PMIs leave little doubt that the Bank of England will remain firmly in “wait and see” mode on monetary policy at February’s MPC [Monetary Policy Committee] meeting this week and until after the Brexit situation becomes clearer. Recent moderating inflation facilitates the MPC adopting a cautious approach on interest rates.”
