 * Turmoil in Westminster brings largest part of economy to standstill
* Services sector growth only just in expansion territory, PMI index shows
* FTSE 100 hits four-month high as sterling slides below $1.31 vs dollar
* HMV rescue deal to save nearly 1500 jobs
* This could be the year emerging markets take off
* Don’t bank on the politicised euro dethroning the dollar anytime soon
5:03PMMarkets wrap: Economy on brink of contraction as sterling slides below $1.31
The UK economy is on the brink of contraction after the services sector stuttered to a standstill in January amid mounting Brexit uncertainty.
The services sector, which accounts for around 80pc of the economy, suffered its worst performance since the Brexit vote in IHS Markit's PMI survey. The closely-watched index stumbled to a reading of 50.1 last month, well below economists' expectations. Any reading above 50 indicates expansion.
The largest part of the economy slid towards contraction territory last month as the Brexit impasse in Westminster forces businesses to turn cautious. IHS Markit economist Chris Williamson warned that the UK economy is in its "weakest growth spell for six years" and blamed "Brexit anxiety" for the slowdown.
The economy could contract in the first quarter as the threat of a no deal Brexit lingers, said ING economist James Knightley.
"It is clear that business is worried and with the Brexit uncertainty set to continue, the risk is that activity softens further."
Sterling edged lower as the services sector slowdown completed a trio of disappointing PMI surveys for January. It slid 0.6pc versus the euro, falling to [Euro]1.1341, while sterling dipped below $1.30 against the dollar.
4:29PMFTSE 100 racks up sixth day of gains on sinking sterling
The pound's slide gathering pace this afternoon has propelled the FTSE 100 to its highest level in almost four months.
The index has leapt 2pc in today's global rally ahead of Donald Trump's State of the Union address after stellar earnings from industry bellwethers, such as Alphabet and BP. The FTSE 100 is on course to rack up a sixth day of gains as sterling sinks.
Joshua Mahony at IG explained why this morning's services sector slowdown spooked currency traders:
"With services output growth falling to a two-and-a-half year low, it is clear that with less than two months until the deadline, firms are now starting to believe that a no-deal Brexit is a very real possibility. With Q4 GDP now expected to come in at a mere 0.1%, there is even more reason to believe that Thursday will see the BoE will bring a substantially more dovish stance compared with prior meetings."
The pound has slid 0.6pc versus the euro at [Euro]1.1341.
Markets Hub I FTSE 1003:50PMLiam Fox plans to slash import duties if no deal Brexit sends prices soaring
Duties on goods entering Britain could be slashed to zero to offset a slide in sterling if no Brexit deal is struck.
It is feared the move could put UK firms protected by the levies at risk by allowing cheap imports from markets such as India and China to flood in.
International Trade Secretary Liam Fox has raised the issue of cutting levies on imports to zero in the event of a no deal Brexit at meetings with industry groups in recent weeks, the Huffpost website first reported .
Read Anna Isaac's full report here
3:03PMUS economy shrugs off global slowdown
The US services sector shrugged off the global slowdown in January as growth inched down to a four-month low.
The sector's growth held up last month slipping slightly in IHS Markit's PMI index to score of 54.2 from 54.4 (any reading above 50 indicates growth).
IHS Markit said that the robust performance of the US economy was "in stark contrast to the near-stalling of growth seen in Europe, China and Japan".
It added:
"Although still robust, the rates of economic growth, job creation and inflation signalled by the PMI surveys have cooled since peaks seen last year. This possibly reflects some impact from the government shutdown."
2:29PMCar market still stalling as Nissan sales suffer
Demand for new vehicles fell for a fifth consecutive month in January, with Nissan suffering one of the steepest declines.
Car registrations dipped 1.6pc to 161,013 compared with January last year, according to the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT).
Nissan sales declined 12pc to 6,969, while Ford plunged more than 15pc to 16,629 vehicles.
Read LaToya Harding's full report here
1:50PMUS services sector and Trump's State of the Union address under spotlight in New York
After disappointing performances by the UK and eurozone's services sectors, attention is turning to the stronger US economy this afternoon.
Growth in its services sector showed signs of slowing at the end of last year but remained strong. While the UK's sector is on the brink of contraction, US services growth is expected to hold firm at a score of 54.2 this afternoon.
Donald Trump's delayed State of the Union speech is also in focus in New York.
Craig Erlam at OANDA provided this preview of the US president's hotly-anticipated address:
"The speech is going to be closely monitored by investors, keen to get an update on trade talks with China and border security, or more specifically the wall, which led to the longest ever government shutdown last month and could trigger another in just over a week.
"There have been plenty of reports that Trump is considering using emergency powers to deliver on his promise of border wall funding and this could be the platform for it, or at least a strong hint of an intention to do so."
I used to look forward to the State of the Union address, but now it feels like the start of the hunger games. #SOTU
- Joyce Alene (@JoyceWhiteVance) February 5, 2019
Politico on what to expect at the #SOTUpic.twitter.com/iuoTPhyS9g
- Adam Linton (@Adamlinton1) February 5, 2019
1:41PMActivist steps up shake-up at Barclays
Activist investor Sherborne is stepping up its attempt to shake up banking giant Barclays.
This afternoon it has confirmed that it will propose installing boss Edward Bramson on the bank's board at its annual general meeting in May.
Mr Bramson told shareholders last month that he did "not have confidence" that he could influence Barclays from the sidelines.
12:53PMEconomic crunch looms as exports slump and companies stop hiring
Britain’s long economic recovery could be at an end as foreign demand slumped last month, neighbours in the eurozone flirted with recession, and the UK's hiring spree faltered.
Businesses grew at the slowest pace since the wake of the EU referendum in 2016, blaming uncertainty over Brexit as a key factor holding back demand.
New orders dropped for the first time in more than two years. As a result employment may have fallen from recent record highs with businesses increasingly choosing not to replace staff who leave.
Read Tim Wallace's full report here
12:22PMFTSE 100 surges past 7,100 on weaker pound
The FTSE 100 has surged past the 7,100 mark for the first time in three months as blue-chip stocks rally on strong earnings and a weaker pound.
Sterling's dip after the disappointing services sector indicator has boosted the FTSE 100 to a 1.4pc jump.
The index has now jumped almost 6pc in just a week as sterling's woes alleviate the pressure on London's big overseas earners. Oil giant BP is doing the heavy lifting today, its shares leaping 5.2pc following its strong results.
Markets Hub I FTSE 10011:45AMLosses widen at Ocado as tech investments weigh
Investments in its technology and distribution centres meant that losses widened at Ocado despite rapid sales growth.
The online supermarket's losses before tax grew to £44.4m in the year to Dec 2 compared to £9.8m the same period the year before. Sales rose 12.3pc to £1.6bn.
It was boosted by earnings in its retail division rising 4.2pc to £82.5m. However its solutions division, which designs and licenses online ­grocery shopping technology for supermarkets around the world, made a loss of £18m.
Read the full report here
10:53AMSterling edges lower after gloomy growth indicator
Sterling has edged down below [Euro]1.14 versus the euro after another gloomy UK growth indicator.
However, Pantheon Macro economist Samuel Tombs believes that the PMI surveys could be exaggerating the slowdown. He notes that PMI scores "tend to overstate the impact of political uncertainty on the economy", pointing out that growth did slow sharply after the Brexit vote.
He added that the PMI surveys also do not include the retail and mining sectors, which have shown signs of rebounding.
PMIs point to zero GDP growth in Q1. But:
1) they've been wide of the mark by ±0.3pp on ave. since '04
2) they tend to overstate impact of pol. uncertainty (Jul 16)
3) they exclude retail and mining which seem to be recovering after bad Q4
I'm still looking for 0.3 q/q in Q1 pic.twitter.com/S9SmhZFYC9
- Samuel Tombs (@samueltombs) February 5, 2019
10:31AM'UK economy could contract in Q1'
All three PMI surveys tracking the UK economy disappointed in January, dragging the UK's composite score to a post-Brexit vote low of 50.3, just in expansion territory.
This morning's survey tracking the services sector, which makes up around 80pc of the economy, will cause the most alarm.
The economy could contract in the first quarter as the looming threat of a no deal Brexit causes business and consumer caution to intensify, according to ING.
"It is clear that business is worried and with the Brexit uncertainty set to continue, the risk is that activity softens further - firms will become increasingly risk averse and implement contingency Brexit planning," said ING economist James Knightley.
10:06AMEurozone economy slightly better than first feared
Final Eurozone Composite PMI reads 51.0 (DEC - 51.1, JAN FLASH - 50.7), signalling slower growth. Italy and France were the key drags in Jan, with both contracting. Employment growth also slowed to a 28-mo low. Jan PMI consistent with just 0.1% growth. https://t.co/JPUqBvpEVhpic.twitter.com/BA6gVVJKH2
- IHS Markit PMI™ (@IHSMarkitPMI) February 5, 2019
There is some marginally more upbeat news out of the eurozone this morning.
IHS Markit's PMI survey indicates that its economy performed better than first feared in January. However, growth still slowed for a fifth straight month and slipped to its lowest level in five-and-a-half years.
The eurozone's composite PMI index dipped slightly to a score of 51 from 51.1, slightly higher than the preliminary reading.
9:48AM'Economy suffering weakest spell in six years'
Triple whammy of woes as UK services #PMI falls in Jan to signal stanation. Follows news of manufacturing and construction dragging on GDP. With the exception of July 2016, service providers suffered biggest drop in new business since April 2009 https://t.co/dNPeQXoPfWpic.twitter.com/rHGGhN9ffw
- Chris Williamson (@WilliamsonChris) February 5, 2019
The UK economy is in its "weakest growth spell for six years" after another disappointing PMI survey reading, according to IHS Markit.
Its economist Chris Williamson said that growth likely stagnated at the start of 2019 after the PMI surveys showed growth stuttering to just 0.1pc in the fourth quarter.
Official GDP growth figures will drop next Monday and are likely to show a sharp slowdown from the bumper 0.6pc growth in the third quarter.
A word of caution. The PMI surveys are not an exact measure of growth but do undoubtedly signal a slowdown in recent months.
9:37AMServices sector brought to a standstill by Brexit impasse as growth slumps to post-EU referendum low
The UK's services sector was brought to a standstill in January as the economy struggles to cope with heightened Brexit uncertainty.
IHS Markit's closely-watched PMI survey showed that growth in the largest part of the economy stuttered to a reading of 50.1 from 51.2 (any reading above 50 indicates expansion).
Brexit uncertainty was blamed by survey respondents for the sharp drop-off in growth to its lowest level since the referendum as new orders declined for the first time since July 2016.
8:55AMOil giants drive FTSE 100 higher after stellar resultsMarkets Hub I FTSE 100
Oil giants BP and Shell have underpinned the FTSE 100's rally to a three-month high in recent days.
BP shares have jumped 3.6pc in early trade after its results smashed analysts' estimates while Shell shares have extended their winning streak to a fifth day after it also wowed the City with its earnings last week.
The jump in the two oil majors' shares this morning accounts for around a third of the FTSE 100's 0.8pc gain.
8:44AMHMV rescue deal to save nearly 1,500 jobs
HMV has been bought out of administration by Canadian record chain Sunrise Records.
The deal, headed by entrepreneur Doug Putman, will rescue 100 HMV stores and save almost 1,500 jobs. But 27 stores will close with immediate effect, resulting in 455 redundancies. It was first reported by The Sunday Telegraph.
Mr Putman, who bought HMV Canada out of bankruptcy in January 2017, said: "We are delighted to acquire the most iconic music and entertainment business in the UK and add nearly 1,500 employees to our growing team.
Read the full report here
8:42AMAgenda: FTSE 100 hits three-month high but services sector struggles set to confirm global slowdown
The slowing services sector is expected to confirm that the world economy struggled to rebound at the start of the year.
Economists expect services PMI surveys in the UK, US and eurozone to add to signs of stuttering global growth. The UK's services sector is expected to edge down back towards November post-Brexit vote low while the final estimate for the eurozone in January could confirm that growth in currency bloc is at its lowest level in more than five years.
Global markets accelerated following their sluggish start to the week despite economists pencilling in gloomy readings for growth. The FTSE 100 rallied strongly to hit a three-month high, driven higher by a 3.5pc jump in BP shares, while stocks in the eurozone edged up.
Full-year results: Ocado, St Modwen Properties
Trading update: BP
Economics: British Retail Consortium sales (UK), Services PMI index (UK, US & EU), Trade balance (US), ISM non-manufacturing index (US), Retail sales (EZ)
Global stocks continue to shake off their pre-Xmas bout of man-flu. Major indices rallied but in thin trading due to Lunar New Year holiday. Investors remain cautious ahead of Trump's State of the Union address later in the day. US 10y yields at 2.72%, Italy yields keep climbing. pic.twitter.com/khYKnXiEpD
- Holger Zschaepitz (@Schuldensuehner) February 5, 2019
