 Ten days to the presidential election, Senate President, Bukola Saraki, is confident that the victory of the candidate of the People’s Democratic Party (PDP), Alhaji Atiku Abubakar, is guaranteed.
The senate president said Atiku’s endorsement, by well-known and respected individuals and groups, is incontrovertible validation of the results of the scientific polls by the <loc>London</loc> Economist intelligence Unit and the William and Associate team.
Saraki, who is the director general of the PDP Presidential Campaign Council, described the results of the scientific polls as “the true reflections of the wish of the electorate.”
He said “with the latest developments, Nigerians have taken a position that the false claim of integrity and anti-corruption by President Muhammadu Buhari is nothing but election gimmick.”
The senate president further stated that the three major pillars -economy, security and anti corruption- on which Buhari hinged the campaign for his re-election, “have collapsed in the face of realities on the ground.
“The economy has been thoroughly mismanaged. Insecurity has become more widespread and beyond their control while the government encourages and nurtures corruption from within.”
He expressed confidence that Atiku would win the election in a free and fair contest, based on the scientific forecasts by the two groups and the evident, massive nationwide support for the PDP candidate by Nigerian voters.
Saraki urged Nigerians to take a cue from the gale of endorsements and predictions by credible groups in favour of Atiku and vote wisely.
He said: “The endorsements are like tonic to the work of the campaign organisations to intensify our efforts as it is a testament that we are employing the right approach and techniques to market our candidate to Nigerians.
“We have been able to change the narratives.
“We have debunked a lot of lies and rumours being peddled around against our candidate and Nigerians are now better informed.
“Leaders of the ruling party know that they can no longer deceive Nigerians because we have allowed the people to know they are all pretenders; with their claim of integrity and anti-corruption posture.
“The fact that Nigerians expressed favourable opinions while credible private agencies were conducting their research showed that Atiku will defeat the incumbent, president Buhari, next Saturday.”
Five socio-political organisations spread across all the geo-political zones in the country, the Northern Elders Forum, Pan-Niger Delta Forum, Middle Belt Forum, Ohanaeze Ndigbo and Afenifere, had, last Sunday, endorsed Atiku.
The leaders, who spoke on behalf of their groups, were Prof. Ango Abdullahi, Chief Edwin Clark, Chief Ayo Adebanjo, Chief John Nwodo and Mr. Bitrus Pogu.
They urged Nigerians to vote for Atiku because he will bring the desired change to the country.
Before the endorsements, a field work conducted by the Pollster, Williams and Associates revealed that Atiku will defeat Buhari in the February 16 presidential election
The agency had, in a similar field work in 2015, predicted the defeat of President Goodluck Jonathan, using same methodology it employed now.
Similarly, a forecast by The Economist Intelligence Unit in <loc>Africa</loc> revealed that Atiku will defeat Buhari in next week’s presidential poll.
The post Atiku’s victory assured, says Saraki appeared first on The Sun <loc>Nigeria</loc>.
Copyright © 2019 The Sun Publishing Limited. All Rights Reserved. Provided by SyndiGate Media Inc. (Syndigate.info).
