 IRECENTLY spoke at a conference in Wrexham which considered the transport contribution to the Growth Deal for north Wales.
North Wales is often viewed by the south as an idyllic tourist area complementing agriculture. However, wider economic benefits play a key strategic role in linking those areas of high unemployment and low-income areas to high-growth employment markets.
Last week in the Western Mail the CBI and major south Wales companies continued to press their consistent view on the Government's M4 Black Route around Newport as a means of economic growth. They put a case for south Wales, where high unemployment and low incomes are perhaps more widely known about than its north Wales parallel.
The thrust of the M4 proponents was achieving, through successful businesses, the consequent employment and economic benefit, with "tens of thousands of jobs and millions of pounds of private sector investment".
However, the wider economic M4 benefits lie mainly between Cardiff and Bristol. From Bridgend west they diminish and very little if any benefits go to Merthyr and the Valley towns, which might benefit more from additional investment in the Heads of the Valleys road.
The north Wales and Mersey Dee "region" sees investment in the railway network, removing the A55 traffic bottlenecks and crossborder road improvements similar to the lower-cost Newport Blue Route providing for economic growth; rather than a new motorway extension to the M56 in Cheshire.
Both parts of Wales would argue the case for improved connectivity, but we should be aware of oversimplification.
Surveys of large international companies show good transport is in the top four location criteria as a prerequisite, not a guarantor, and many transport economists believe it has a tenuous link to sustainable economic growth.
Indeed, Sir Rod Eddington in his 2006 transport study for HM Treasury (the most recent independent assessment of transport infrastructure's impact on economic performance) was unambiguous - its effectiveness "to deliver large economic stimulus is much less than is commonly assumed" in highly developed industrial nations The concept of the "two-way road" has also to be considered. This has been illustrated by several major road schemes (M4/A48/ A40 in south-west Wales) built to attract employment investors. However, in many cases it has succumbed to the economies of scale. The dairy industry in Wales has benefited from the reduced cost of moving bulk milk - however, only at the expense of small dairy farmers forced to cease trading as the new processing plants became too great an investment; and milk production units forced to close in Carmarthenshire, with tankers moving bulk milk to major production plants nearer to the market on the M4 corridor in England. Funding, of course, is at the heart of the discussion with the £738m Valley Lines electrification and new trains for Wales; and the £1.5bn for the new M4. HM Treasury has authorised £1bn of "M4" borrowing but this could be used elsewhere.
To provide faster links between north Wales and Liverpool City Region, and to achieve the benefits of HS2, the Growth Track 360 report seeks capital investment of £1.02bn on the rail network.
The CBI has suggested a toll road rather than no road. This repeats the 1996 tolling argument on the second Severn Crossing, which the CBI said constrained south Wales' economic growth for 22 years.
Unlike estuarial bridges, which are very successful, motorway tolls have led to low usage on, for example, the M6 Birmingham toll motorway and on most French auto-routes, because car-users have a slower, but free, alternative. And shadow tolls, as on the A55 across Ynys Mon, are costly to the Government.
It has been said that the Cardiff rail investment will reduce traffic by only 8%, contrary to many other schemes. In Bordeaux peak traffic fell by 40%, suggesting the east-west "metro" should also be considered.
The First Minister is currently undertaking due diligence on the M4 investment. He will no doubt consider the public inquiry report but be mindful that in benefit cost ratio analysis, total (not individual) travel times play a bigger part than strategic and wider economic effects.
High-quality public transport investment can be a more effective agglomeration solution than more roads and the opportunity cost, together with a fair distribution of funding, impacting elsewhere in Wales should be a consideration.
It is an unenviable decision and First Minister Mark Drakeford alone (not involving the Transport Cabinet Secretary Ken Skates) will determine the outcome.
¦ Professor Stuart Cole CBE is Emeritus Professor of Transport (Economics and Policy) at the University of South Wales.
Many transport economists believe good transport has a tenuous link to sustainable economic growth
