 <loc>Guwahati</loc>, Feb. 5 -- Contrary to the tradition, the interim budget presented by interim Finance Minister Piyush Goyal on February 1 in Parliament has become a full-fledged budget as it has been packed with some major policies. Traditionally, an interim budget does not envisage or announces any new policy. Goyal's budget lacks such characteristic(s) and tries to present a picture of better future in front of the country. This budget could be considered as an attempt to placate some sections of the society like the middle class, the poor, the farmers and the youth who have been implicitly or explicitly expressing displeasure over the economic policies of the Narendra Modi Government. For PM Modi or the BJP, this budget was the last chance to regain the trust of these vast sections of people ahead of the upcoming Lok Sabha elections. Hence, the Government has taken the last recourse at the budget to stop the slowly blowing anti-incumbency wind and that is the prime reason the NDA Government turning the interim budget to a full-fledged budget. No doubt the budget has become a populist manifestation and it reflects desperation of the NDA regime at the Centre.
This budget will mostly benefit the middle class or salaried people as the exemption of income tax limit has been hiked to Rs 5 lakh for the fiscal year 2019-20 from the current Rs 2.5 lakh. This way the Modi Government chooses to ripen electoral dividend in the upcoming Lok Sabha elections. It is a fact that his Government has done two major economic reforms in the country ' the demonetization and bringing of the Goods and Services Tax (GST) regime. But the Government is yet to convince a large section of the people how these reforms in the economic front benefited the country. The Government has been claiming that demonetization helped increase the income tax base in the fiscal year 2017-18. But it could not be the sole reason of surging of the income tax level in the said fiscal. Another factor, which also helped increase the income tax base, was undoubtedly the Government's reluctance to hike income tax rebate in the 2017-18 budget. The Government abstained from giving such relief to the salaried class even after the implementation of the Seventh Pay Commission's recommendations. Likewise, the Government could not highlight any convincing major gain by the rolling out of the GST.
The NDA Government prepared the interim budget at a time when the BJP faced election debacles in three Hindi heartland States ' <loc>Madhya Pradesh</loc>, <loc>Rajasthan</loc> and <loc>Chhattisgarh</loc>. Indeed, these poll debacles signified the failure of its 'temple and statue politics'. As such, the government machinery had to prepare the budget under tremendous pressure. Had it not asserted relief to the salaried people through the budget, it might give grist to the Opposition's mill to corner the Government or the BJP. This has been the reason behind the Opposition's criticism about the budget sounding staccato. While former Finance Minister P Chidambaram termed the budget as copy of the previous UPA's budget, senior Congress leader Mallikarjun Kharge criticized it as the election gimmick of the BJP.
In his budget speech, FM Goyal tried to spread a lot of positivity across the country. As for instance, the budgetary allocation for the North-east has been increased 21% or to Rs 58,166 crore for the upcoming fiscal year. The Government has also tried to distribute freebies among the poor farmers.
The present state of the country's economy could not be considered as good as the debt burden has increased alarmingly. The 8th edition of the Status Paper on Government Debt, which was published recently, revealed that the debt burden of the country hiked to more than Rs 82 lakh crore during the last four-and-a-half years from Rs 54,90,763 lakh crore. Certainly, it has also mounted pressure upon the Government. The NPA crises have seriously affected the public sector banks. The recent data of the National Sample Survey Organization (NSSO) about the employment statistics in the fiscal year 2017-18 of the country has also put pressure upon the Government. The comments on the Modi Government by three eminent economists, former NITI Aayog vice-chairman Dr Arvind Panagaria, former Chief Economic Adviser Dr Arvind Subramanian and the PM's Economic Advisory Council member Surajit Singh Bhalla, were definitely an embarrassment for the NDA regime. Apart from that the Government is yet to deliver its promises made during the last Lok Sabha elections. Similarly, it has still not achieved significant success in some flagship programmes and schemes like Digital <loc>India</loc>, Make in <loc>India</loc>, Startup <loc>India</loc>, Standup <loc>India</loc>, etc. Rather Modi has been reiterating his old promises of making <loc>India</loc> strong in all fronts. He is yet to reach the poor and lower middle-class people. He also could not achieve commendable success in the fight against corruption or black money. Demonetization, as some economists have viewed, could not eliminate corruption in the government and check the menace of black money. Despite his promise of bringing back black money stashed in some foreign banks by some dishonest and tax evading Indians, PM Modi has gone on the back foot in this regard. It was quite unexpected and unwelcoming step of the PM as well as his government. These have given the critics of the Government and the Opposition the much-needed fodder to criticize the Modi regime.
It has been learnt that the interim budget of Piyush Goyal has disheartened those who are concerned with the education sector. Some critics have started to vent anger that the Government has showed its disinterest towards the uplift of the education sector.
Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from <loc>Assam</loc> Tribune.
For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
