 The economy came to a virtual standstill last month as activity in the services sector stalled and jobs were cut amid rising political uncertainty. The index on services compiled by IHS Markit and the Chartered Institute of Procurement & Supply was 50.1 in January, down from 51.2 in December and close to the 50 mark that separates growth from contraction. It was the lowest since the stumble after the Brexit referendum and the second weakest since December 2012. IHS Markit and the institute said that order volumes had slowed and that the backlog of work had fallen for a fourth month. The figures completed the set of January purchasing managers' indices, after manufacturing and construction, and the three together painted a dismal picture of the state of the economy. Chris Williamson, chief business economist at IHS Markit, said: "The results indicate the UK economy is at risk of stalling or worse as escalating Brexit uncertainty coincides with a wider slowdown in the global economy." The PMI surveys are followed closely. Companies covered employ about 13 million people, roughly one third of the labour force. Services alone account for almost 80 per cent of GDP. The composite index of three surveys found staff numbers had fallen for the first time since July 2016 and at their fastest rate since November 2012, while orders fell for the second time since 2012. "Responses suggest that businesses 'overwhelmingly' linked the weakness to political uncertainty," Elizabeth Martins, UK economist at HSBC, said. The weak data meant there was "almost no chance of a rate rise this week". The Bank of England publishes its interest rate decision tomorrow. Howard Archer, adviser to the EY Item Club, said: "Overall, the purchasing managers' surveys point to very weak UK economic activity in January." James Smith, an economist at ING, said: "The risk is that activity softens further. Firms will become increasingly risk-averse and will implement contingency Brexit planning." CREDIT: Miles Costello, Philip Aldrick
