 Korea falls behind Germany, China in tech revolution
By Park Hyong-ki
The country does not have a single innovative manufacturer on the global list by McKinsey Global Institute and the World Economic Forum (WEF).
The WEF and McKinsey's research group recently issued a report, listing 16 global manufacturers' factories that meet the criteria of being 'innovative and game changers.'
They have seen growth through the use of emerging technologies related to the Fourth Industrial Revolution.
The 16 companies are: Bayer, BMW, Bosch, Danfoss, Fast Radius, Foxconn, Haier, Johnson & Johnson, Phoenix Contact, Procter & Gamble, Rold, Sandvik Coromant, Saudi Aramco, Schneider Electric, Siemens and Tata Steel.
Their plants in the U.S., Europe and China are referred to as 'lighthouse factories' as they serve as 'beacons for the world, exemplifying the type of production approach that can drive the next engine of global growth,' McKinsey and the WEF said.
They have not only integrated technologies such as big data, artificial intelligence, cloud computing and the internet of things into their production, but also actively executed open innovation strategies for collaboration with small- and medium-sized enterprises, they added.
McKinsey in Seoul said they could not spot any innovative Korean manufacturers in the selection process. McKinsey and the WEF scanned more than 1,000 manufacturers around the world, and contacted 150 companies for lighthouse consideration.
Analysts say the country has clearly been falling behind in implementing policies encouraging the private sector to prepare for the Fourth Industrial Revolution.
It is highly aware that a 'perfect storm' is coming, but has lacked policy preparedness compared to Germany's 'Industry 4.0' and China's so-called 'Made in China 2025.'
'The common concept of those policies is that they are letting the private sector lead the technological revolution,' said Yun Chang-hyun, an economist at the University of Seoul.
The economist pointed to the dynamism of innovation in Silicon Valley in the United States, and Germany's industrial policy to spur manufacturing competitiveness through the adoption of Fourth Industrial Revolution technologies.
'China has also been very aggressive with its vision to become an advanced manufacturing economy by 2025,' Yun said.
China's Made in China 2025 plan was formed in 2015, aimed at boosting research and development in emerging tech sectors such as robotics, clean energy and biotechnology. It also seeks to rely less on foreign technologies such as semiconductors.
Lee Jang-gyoon, a senior researcher at Hyundai Research Institute, agreed the country needs to further devise a policy that can bolster the private sector to create the 'next big thing.'
The country has been trying to prepare for the revolution, but the lack of domestic lighthouses is because Korean manufacturers are not, by nature, trendsetters, he added.
'Most of the manufacturers here rely on exports for growth. This would push them to set up plants or bases overseas where they can sell their products but also where they can follow and seek innovation of others,' Lee said.
He pointed to Hyundai Motor establishing innovation centers abroad.
Manufacturers that seek to change and boost their capacity should 'augment, instead of replace, human capital' through lifelong learning to help people to gain skills and adapt to new situations, the institute suggested.
It also said companies should seek to collaborate with other firms and startups via open innovation platforms, which can help manage their data and output.
