 FRANKFURT—German manufacturers reported a sharp drop in orders at the end of last year, a sign that businesses around the world may be holding back on new investments in the face of trade uncertainty.
The drop in new orders indicates Europe's largest economy is unlikely to rebound quickly from a slowdown that saw it flirt with recession in the second half of 2018. The nature of the fall—which was led by demand from outside the eurozone, and for purchases of capital goods—suggests German weakness may be the reflection of a wider malaise as businesses around the world await the outcome of a trade dispute between China and the U.S.
During the course of 2018, the U.S. government imposed tariffs on a widening range of Chinese imports, provoking retaliatory measures. The two sides agreed a 90-day truce on Dec. 1, and the U.S. is dispatching its chief trade negotiator, Robert Lighthizer, and Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin to Beijing early next week to continue trade talks as a March 1 deadline to reach an accord nears.
Related
* Analysis: Europe Has America's Globalization Problems on Steroids
* U.S. Trade Negotiators Heading to Beijing Next Week (Feb. 15, 2019)
* Germany's Sharp Slowdown Fans Fears That China Woes Are Spreading (Jan. 15, 2019)
In a report Monday, the United Nations said further tariff hikes by the U.S. and China would have a negative impact on the many other countries that supply parts to businesses based in either country, warning that "the tit for tat moves of the trade giants are likely to have a domino effect beyond the countries and sectors targeted."
The country's economics ministry on Wednesday said the "dry spell in German industry" appears to be continuing. Germany's statistics agency said factory orders were down 1.6% in December from November, and 7% compared with the past month of 2017. That was a surprise, since economists polled by The Wall Street Journal had expected a 0.3% month-to-month rise.
"Germany is a major producer of capital goods and could hence be seen as a bellwether for the global investment cycle," said Elga Bartsch, who heads economic and markets research at the BlackRock Investment Institute. "Some of the weakness that we see in Europe, and also in Germany specifically, is tied to the greater exposure to the very marked slowdown in global trade dynamics."
German weakness is a worry for the eurozone. The currency area's industrial powerhouse has been a source of stability since the financial crisis over a decade ago, as its intrepid exporters found buyers overseas while demand closer to home remained feeble.
That is particularly true of tools and equipment makers, who have found strong demand from China and other developing economies that have boosted their own industrial capacity over recent decades. But that success may have left Germany vulnerable to the fall in global business confidence last year amid uncertainty over the obstacles that lay ahead for international trade.
The overall fall in December from the previous month was driven by a 5.5% decline in orders from outside the eurozone. While new orders from European buyers for consumer goods increased by 4.2% on the month, those for capital goods fell 2.5%. Compared with December 2017, orders for capital goods were 6.4% lower.
Manufacturing orders can be highly volatile, but the December figures are in keeping with other forward-looking measures that suggest the German economy may struggle to grow in the early months of this year.
Economists at Deutsche Bank say the German economy will likely contract in the first quarter, having narrowly avoided that fate in the final three months of 2018.
"The much weaker than expected January business surveys and in particular the slump in their more forward looking components are clearly pointing into this direction," they said in a note to clients.
A prolonged period of weakness would lower Germany's demand for the exports of other eurozone members, spreading the pain across the currency area. That comes at a time when a number of large eurozone members are already faltering, with Italy in recession and French growth held back by a series of protests against President Emmanuel Macron's economic reforms.
There were fresh signs of those problems in a survey of construction companies that was also released on Wednesday. The IHS Markit survey found that building work in the currency area came close to stalling in January, with a decline in France and very modest increases in Germany and Italy.
Write to Nina Adam at nina.adam@wsj.com
