 * Shock plunge in German factory orders growth fuels eurozone recession fears
* FTSE 100 edges away from four-month high, snapping six-day winning run
* Traders underwhelmed by Trump State of the Union speech
* Eurozone hovers on the brink of recession
* Treasury must prepare for a major stimulus for no deal
* London's property market is Brexit-proof - and here's why
5:21PMMarkets wrap: FTSE 100's best run in 10 months ended by eurozone woes and Trump disappointment
The FTSE 100 snapped a six-day winning streak after another shock slowdown in German factories fuelled fears that the eurozone is sliding towards recession.
German factory orders growth slumped 7pc year-on-year in December, the biggest drop since 2012, as dwindling foreign demand pulled the sector into contraction territory for a second straight month. Economists had expected monthly growth to enjoy a modest rebound but its decline accelerated, sinking 1.6pc.
The woeful data from Germany's large industrial sector added to mounting fears of stumbling growth in the eurozone. A PMI survey for the currency bloc revealed yesterday that the slowdown has extended into 2019 with growth edging down to its lowest level in more than five years.
ING economist Carsten Brzeski warned that the figures suggest the slump in German factories "gained new momentum towards the end of the year". The recent build-up of factory inventory indicates that any rebound in its manufacturing sector in the coming months will be "slow and sluggish", he added.
The DAX, Germany's blue-chip stock index, led the move lower on European markets, dropping as much as 0.6pc. The FTSE 100 snapped a six-day winning streak, its best run since April, after Donald Trump’s State of the Union address underwhelmed investors.
The FTSE 100 flirted with positive territory late in trading but was eventually pulled off its near four-month high, closing 4.28 points down at 7,173.09. US stocks also nudged down after Mr Trump provided few clues to trade talks progress and renewed his pledge to build a wall on the Mexican border, stoking worries over another government shutdown .
4:39PMGlaxo hunts more deals to stay competitive, Walmsley says
GSK is on the lookout for more deals this year that will replenish its drugs pipeline and give it an edge over rivals in an increasingly competitive pharmaceuticals sector, its chief executive said.
Emma Walmsley said there would be no slowdown in corporate activity and to expect further deals, particularly in oncology.
“I have always absolutely clear that the number one priority is to strengthen the pipeline,” she said.
Read the full report by Julia Bradshaw here
4:00PMFTSE 100 on course to snap six-day winning streakMarkets Hub I FTSE 100
The FTSE 100 is on course to snap its six-day winning streak, its best run in 10 months.
However, the index has trimmed its losses back to just a 0.1pc drop despite the pound's strong gains.
Fiona Cincotta at City Index explained that Donald Trump has "dented risk appetite" with his underwhelming State of the Union address.
She said:
"Traders had been optimistic that Trump would provide further details on developments in US - Sino trade relations, instead little sign of progress saw investors adopt a more cautious approach to trading on Wednesday."
3:23PMMade.com sales soar as furniture shoppers shift online
Made.com, the online furniture retailer, said sales jumped more than a third last year as shoppers become more comfortable with buying expensive, big items over the internet.
The company, which sells upmarket furniture ordered directly from designers, revealed sales rose 37pc to a record £173m. In the UK sales were up 34pc to £100m, while international sales rose by 40pc following the brand's launch in Spain.
Philippe Chaineiux, Made boss, said that Europe would overtake the UK as the brand's biggest market this year after pushing into new markets including Portugal, Italy, Denmark and Sweden.
Read Ashley Armstrong's full report here
3:14PMOcado fire prompts warning on sales growth
Laith Khalaf of Hargreaves Lansdown said: "The fire is going to be disruptive for Ocado in the immediate future, but shouldn’t unduly damage its long term prospects, provided this doesn’t prove to be a systemic risk that comes from letting robots run warehouses.
"A large part of Ocado’s market value lies in its ability to license out its cutting edge systems to supermarkets across the globe. It therefore needs to provide reassurance this is an isolated incident, as well as trying to keep the wheels of the delivery vans turning for UK customers."
Markets Hub - Ocado Group PLC2:50PMUS stocks in the red
The Dow Jones is trading 0.17pc lower on opening at 25,367.27 points while the S&P 500 is flat. It is 0.04pc down at 2,736.36.
Markets Hub I Dow Jones Industrial Average2:35PMFirst-time buyers help boost Barratt and Redrow profits
Two of Britain’s largest housebuilders have posted booming profits as the sector continues to be buoyed by strong demand from first-time buyers and the Government’s Help to Buy Scheme.
Barratt Developments made £408m in the six months to December, up by a fifth on the same period in 2017, while smaller rival Redrow posted a 5pc rise to £185m for the half-year.
David Thomas, chief executive of Barratt, said: “We are already the largest housebuilder in the UK by some distance but we still have ambitions to grow.”
Read Jack Torrance's full report here
2:18PMGreg Clark warns companies to brace for no-deal Brexit
Business Secretary Greg Clark has warned companies to prepare for the possibility of a no-deal Brexit as fears mount that the UK could crash out of the European Union in a matter of weeks.
He told MPs that without an agreement, businesses that rely on international supply chains would be “sensible” to prepare for the worst.
“It is a fact that we don’t know the terms of our future trading relationship with the rest of the European Union,” he told the Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy Committee on Wednesday.
Read Vinjeru Mkandawire's full report here
1:52PMStock market movers
Ocado shares have slumped this afternoon on the back of its warehouse fire, it is currently trading more than 8pc lower at 950p.
Following behind is small business lender Funding Circle, which has fallen 3.43pc to 313.70p, while Royal Mail has dropped 3.39pc to 276.60p.
The FTSE 250 postal service received negative comments from analysts at Societe Generale which said it will struggle to grow.
Among the FTSE leaders is CYBG, the owner of Clydesdale and Yorkshire banks, which has climbed more than 14pc to 204.80p.
Markets Hub - Royal Mail PLC1:39PMWall Street called to open lower
With just under an hour to go until the opening bell, it looks as if US stocks will open in the red today...
US Opening Calls: #DOW 25370 -0.12% #SPX 2730 -0.23% #NASDAQ 7007 -0.20% #IGOpeningCall
- IGSquawk (@IGSquawk) February 6, 2019
1:27PMBob Diamond quits African banking venture Atlas Mara
Bob Diamond, the former Barclays chief executive, has stood down as chairman of the African banking business he set up more than six years ago.
Atlas Mara, founded in 2013 by Mr Diamond and an entrepreneur once dubbed Africa's youngest billionaire, told investors he was stepping away "to increase his focus on his other executive roles".
The London-listed company said Mr Diamond will become a non-executive director while Michael Wilkerson, the boss of its largest shareholder Fairfax Africa, will replace him as chairman.
The move comes as part of a wider shake-up at Atlas Mara, which has appointed Citigroup to help it evaluate potential deals and identify areas it should move away from.
Read Lucy Burton's full report here
12:56PMAussie dollar slides after rates cut hint
The Australian dollar is the biggest laggard on currency markets this afternoon after its central bank stunned investors by signalling a cut to interest rates amid signs of slowing global growth.
Arnaud Masset at Swissquote Bank explained that the Reserve Bank of Australia "wants to keep some room for manoeuvre, in case the Chinese slowdown proves to be more acute".
He pointed out that 38pc of Australia's exports go to China, warning that the currency will remain under pressure until "at least the end of the Sino-USA trade conflict".
The Australian dollar slumped 1.4pc versus the pound following the rate cut hint.
[CHART] No bounce for the Aussie dollar after slumping half a US cent after RBA Governor unexpectedly suggests the next move in rates could be up or down
Aussie now US71.70 cents #ausbiz#markets#ausecon#auspolpic.twitter.com/B7daYikgSJ
- CommSec (@CommSec) February 6, 2019
12:09PMOcado cancels orders after fire rips through its Andover warehouse
The online supermarket Ocado has been forced to cancel orders and warned of a "hit to sales" after a huge fire ripped through its robotic warehouse in Hamphire.
Around 200 firefighters were deployed to tackle the blaze which began at the Andover facility at 2.44am on Tuesday.
Hampshire Fire and Rescue Service (HFRS) said four of its firefighters had been treated for slight smoke inhalation as they battled to bring the inferno under control.
Read the full report here
11:30AMFTSE 100 flirts with gains but mood sour in Europe
The Recession word is getting louder. #Germany 's Industrial Order dropped 1.6% in Dec m/m vs a gain of +0.3% expected. Capital goods orders fall 2.5% m/m. pic.twitter.com/J4cA5gmyNQ
- Holger Zschaepitz (@Schuldensuehner) February 6, 2019
The FTSE 100 is flirting with positive territory after trimming its losses but the mood is still subdued on the Continent.
The DAX index, which tracks Frankfurt's top stocks, has drifted down to a 0.5pc loss while US stocks are expected to nudge lower after investors were underwhelmed by Donald Trump's State of the Union address.
IG analyst Joshua Mahony explained why markets have been unnerved by the recent factory data out of Germany:
While traders are used to the notion of weakness within countries such as Italy and Greece, this recent phenomenon of a stuttering Germany is certainly more of a worry for eurozone growth. With Brexit uncertainty and US led trade friction, this decrease in factory orders highlights the weaker demand that comes with time of significant upheaval and uncertainty."
10:57AMInterserve rescue plan wipes out shareholders and hands control to banks
Interserve has announced a rescue deal that wipes out shareholders and hands control to its banks following crunch talks with lenders and government ministers on Tuesday night.
The debt-for-equity rescue deal aims to cut the outsourcer's debt from about £600m to £275m and safeguard 45,000 UK jobs.
New shares worth about £480m will be placed with its lenders, which include RBS, HSBC and BNP Paribas.
Read the full report by Charlie Taylor-Kroll here
10:21AMMarkets disappointed by Trump's State of the Union address
Markets were looking to Donald Trump's State of the Union address for some direction but the US president failed to inspire investors.
Mr Trump "left traders empty-handed", offering nothing new on trade talks with China for investors to "sink their teeth into", said Jasper Lawler of LCG. Mr Trump vowed to build the wall on Mexican border, suggesting that the US is facing another government shutdown when a three-week stopgap funding deal ends.
However, shares in drugmakers AstraZeneca and GlaxoSmithKline have edged down after he renewed his pledge to tackle high drug prices.
9:41AMSterling rallies versus euro after gloomy factory data
This morning's gloomy factory data from Germany has helped the pound reverse yesterday's losses versus the euro.
Sterling has rebounded 0.4pc against the common currency to just below [Euro]1.14.
The recent build-up of German factory inventory suggests that any rebound in its vital industrial sector in the coming months will be "slow and sluggish", according to ING economist Carsten Brzeski.
The latest data suggests that the decline in its factories "gained new momentum towards the end of the year", he added.
Markets Hub - Euro8:57AMGerman stocks lead decline on European markets
German stocks are leading the broad decline on European markets this morning after more disappointing data from its crucial industrial sector.
The DAX has dipped 0.4pc in early trade after largely flat, holiday-hit trading in Asia overnight.
The year-on-year figure was depressed by the strong end to 2017 but it is "clear" that German manufacturing is "suffering", explained Pantheon Macro economist Claus Vistesen.
Uh-oh! #Germany 's factory orders are down a whopping 7% YoY in December. Germany is not of out the #recession woods yet! pic.twitter.com/ojUqd0OCUP
- jeroen blokland (@jsblokland) February 6, 2019
8:38AMHotel booking sites agree to stop 'misleading' sales after CMA probe
Six online hotel booking sites have agreed to major changes to end misleading sales tactics, hidden charges and other practices after an investigation by the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA).
Expedia, Booking.com, Agoda, Hotels.com, ebookers and trivago have voluntarily committed to the measures, including changes to make search results clearer, to end pressure selling, make discount claims more transparent and display all compulsory charges.
The CMA said it will now seek to "do whatever it can" to bring the rest of the online hotel booking sector up to the same standard.
Read the full report here
8:34AMAgenda: Markets drift lower after woeful Germany data as growth worries mount
The strong rally on markets showed signs of waning after another shock slowdown in German factories and Donald Trump's State of the Union address failed to inspire investors.
German factory orders growth slumped 7pc year-on-year in December, the biggest drop since 2012. Economists had expected monthly growth to enjoy a modest rebound but dwindling foreign demand dragged the manufacturing sector into contraction for a second consecutive month.
The slowdown in Europe's engine room fuelled fears that the eurozone is sinking toward recession. Yesterday the currency bloc's composite PMI index showed growth at its weakest level in more than five years.
Stocks drifted lower following more weak data from Germany, giving up some of yesterday's strong gains.
The FTSE 100 slipped off a near four-month high, edging 0.1pc lower, while eurozone blue-chip stocks fell 0.2pc in early trade.
Interim results: Barratt Developments, Redrow
Trading update: CYBG, Electrocomponents, GlaxoSmithKline, Severn Trent, Victrex
Global stock markets flat to negative following horrible econ data from Germany. Trump’s SoTU met expectations. He spoke positively about trade talks w/ #China . Announced a new summit w/ Kim Jung Un for Feb27. US 10y yield slips to 2.68, 10y Bund yield to 0.15%. Euro drops <$1.14. pic.twitter.com/7YSSF75IKl
- Holger Zschaepitz (@Schuldensuehner) February 6, 2019
