 Reserve Bank governor Philip Lowe had one piece of good news for homebuyers in his speech yesterday: he has changed his mind about raising interest rates. Since August 2016, when the RBA dropped the official cash rate to the current level of 1.5 per cent, Mr Lowe had predicted that the next move in rates would be up. But he is no longer making that prediction and he said yesterday he is just as likely to cut rates as raise them.
Rather than being criticised for this change of direction, Dr Lowe should be applauded. There is nothing worse than persisting with a policy in the face of contradictory evidence just to save face. As the classic economist's wisdom, apocryphally attributed to the great John Maynard Keynes, puts it: "When circumstances change, I change my mind. What do you do?"
Dr Lowe's announcement should give homebuyers comfort that their mortgage repayments will not rise significantly in the next few years but there is also cause for concern in the reasons that motivated the RBA's change of heart. Dr Lowe was expecting to raise rates because he feared the economy would grow too quickly and push up inflation. In fact, after a brief surge, the economy both local and global has slowed.
Chinese growth has faltered recently and the risks of a hard Brexit and a broader trade war have slightly dampened confidence. Domestically, house prices in <loc>Sydney</loc> and <loc>Melbourne</loc> have fallen faster than Dr Lowe was expecting. There are signs households might be rattled by the fall in the value of their biggest asset.
By announcing he is ready to cut rates, Dr Lowe is trying to pre-empt a psychological over-reaction to these developments. He wants households to keep spending and businesses to keep investing.
Some ideological economists will question why Dr Lowe is considering cutting rates far below the emergency level of the global financial crisis when the economy is no longer in crisis. These economists would argue that the low interest rates of recent years have only encouraged a house price bubble and done little for the real economy.
This was always a misrepresentation, since low rates played a crucial role in the housing construction surge of the past few years that helped <loc>Australia</loc> ride out the end of the mining boom.
In any case, the RBA can now take comfort that with house prices down more than 10 per cent there is not much risk cuts will start a bubble.
While there is a debate about whether it is safe, or effective, to cut interest rates down to zero, as they are in <loc>Japan</loc> and <loc>Europe</loc>, the RBA is right to take the pragmatic view that cutting rates a notch or two is a good way to stimulate the economy.
The RBA's public admission that the economy is more sluggish than expected should give federal and state politicians pause for thought. It suggests that while returning the budget to surplus is important it need not be such a high priority over the next few years.
The RBA's stance gives the parties an economic case for some short-term tax relief if well targeted to boost consumption. A much better way to smooth economic growth would be to finance more well-chosen and independently assessed infrastructure projects.
It can sometimes seem that in our 28th year without a recession the Australian economy is due for a fall. But with the right mix of policies, both short- and long-term, we can ride our luck a bit longer.
 
