 Imagine you could invest in property like a managed fund.
Would you buy shares in luxury homes? Or in areas experiencing urban regeneration? What about regional towns?
If you wanted the best capital growth over the past decade, your best bet would have been to throw your money into premium properties, where prices have far outperformed any other segment. Frankly, even if you didn’t pick an absolute winner, it is unlikely you would have lost money on residential property by buying 10 years ago … unless you bought a townhouse or apartment in a mining town, where prices are still down more than 25 per cent from 10 years ago.
By segmenting Australian property into 11 groups we can see that premium properties, defined as those suburbs with prices in the top 1 per cent, as well as those suburbs with residents earning in the top 5 per cent of incomes, have achieved the best price growth over the past decade.
Although they have had a relatively big fall over the past 12 months, they are up 74 per cent over a 10-year period.
Price is an obvious sticking point for most buyers looking at this category, but these properties are also scarce, with less than 120,000 across Australia.
The other areas that have done well are those that are considered affluent, up almost 72 per cent over the same period.
These homes are a bit easier to come by than premium properties, with more than 1.2 million of them across Australia. While you would have done pretty well buying such properties 10 or even five years ago, the drop over the past year has been the most significant of all property types.
For expensive homes across Australia, we have seen a heady increase over the past 10 years.
The more recent drops suggest that prices probably overshot and are now correcting, as opposed to crashing downwards.
With access to finance now an issue and a leap in the number of first-home buyers, it is perhaps not surprising that price growth over the past 12 months has been most significant in areas defined as “struggling urban”.
While you may have not done as well buying 10 years ago in Melton compared to Toorak, the past 12 months are likely to have been far more profitable.
And while investing in mining towns may still seem like a bad idea, it is always best to remember that looking back is not a fair indication of future performance.
While prices may have dropped the most over the past 10 years, the rate of decline has softened and we are now seeing rental yields in these areas the highest of all property types.
These areas may offer the best of both worlds over the next five years if you buy now, offering a combination of high rental yields and capital appreciation. It would be tough to find that combination in Mosman or Surry Hills.Nerida Conisbee is chief economist at REA Group.
