 Wage pause restrains Australians’ spending
The same malaise that led people to vote for Donald Trump, Brexit and a phalanx of European pop­ulists is at work here, and it spells trouble for the Coalition government.
Living standards have been declinin­g for the vast majority of Australian households. Costs have outstripped household incomes by 2.9 per cent over the past three years — something not seen either in the global financial crisis or during the last recession in the early 1990s. After allowing for inflation, household incomes are no higher now than they were in late 2010, as the economy was emerging from the financial crisis.
Households have kept up their spending, despite their depressed incomes, by running down their savings. Their confidence to do so has been supported both by rising house and share prices and by strong growth in employment. But the financial pressures are real and may be coming to the fore as house and share prices slide.
Labor is on to it. “Everything is going up except wages,” declares its brochu­re on the economy ­released at the weekend.
“People are finding it harder to get ahead. Households are saving less and families are forced to dip furthe­r into their pockets to pay for essentials.” Labor cites a measure of nation­al disposable income taken from the quarterly GDP report to claim living standards had risen by 7.6 per cent under the Rudd and Gillard Labor governments but only 2.5 per cent under the ­Coalition.
But this measure includes profits as well as wages, and takes account of changes in export prices, which reached record level­s at the peak of the resources boom in 2011, during the Labor government. It measures the incom­e of the economy as a whole, and reveals little about households. For households, 2011 was actual­ly the year when their incom­es stopped rising faster than their living costs.
A more accurate picture of livin­g standards is provide­d by research­er Ben Phillips from the Australian National University’s Centre for Social Resear­ch & Methods. He looks at household incomes, including wages, social welfare benefits and investment earnings, after deducting interest and taxes. This shows how much households have to spend.
The picture that emerges is one of weak wage growth being compounded by steeply rising taxes. Wages have been rising a little faster than living costs but consumers are falling behind once tax is added into the picture. Personal income tax always rises faster than incomes in the absenc­e of tax cuts because any increas­e in wages pushes a larger share of earnings into a higher tax bracket, even when wages are growing slowly.
The government has understandably been emphasising its recor­d on employment. The 800,000 jobs generated in the past three years has not been surpassed since the Howard government. Employment growth has outstripped the rise in the working-age population.
For households where someone has been unemployed or out of the labour force for family or other reasons, there is a big boost to income when they get a job. Across the nation, a significant share of the growth in household income over the past three years reflects people getting jobs, includin­g many migrants.
However, this means that households where there has been no change in the number of family members in the workforce have suffered a bigger average fall in their living standards than shown in the ANU estimates.
Even in these households, the strength of the labour market adds to a sense of job security. This may give people the confidence to spend and run down their savings, but it does not alter their personal financial circumstances.
The monthly survey of consume­r confidence compiled by Westpac and the Melbourne Instit­ute shows a large majority of people say their personal financial position has worsened this past year. The pressure on living stand­ards has been accentuated by the relatively large rises in the cost of essential services. Electricity ­prices have risen 20 per cent in the past three years while medical services are up 16 per cent, insurance is up 15 per cent and education is up 10 per cent. Households have to adjust by spending relatively less on discretionary items.
These trends are evident across the advanced world. Central bankers used to rely on equations purporting to show that when unemployment fell below a certain level, a predictable wage rise would result, but the maths have failed since the financial crisis. Wages are stagnant everywhere.
Although consumer prices are not rising like they used to either, the widespread feeling among people that they are not making headway is feeding a resentment that populist parties have been able to capitalise upon, promising to tackle the class of insiders it is assumed has been profiting at everyone else’s expense.
In Britain, Labour’s Jeremy Corbyn warns that the “rich are living on borrowed time”, while in the US, Donald Trump vowed to “drain the swamp”. In Australia, Bill Shorten’s villain is the “top end of town”.
So far in Australia, declining living standards have not led to a general consumer funk. Throughout last year, a majority of consume­rs expressed confidence about the outlook for both the economy and their personal finance­s, even if the latter had been struggling for some time.
But the latest trends raise concern. Consumers cut spending at Christmas, car sales are down sharply and economists with the big banks say their internal tracking of card transactions shows continuing weakness. A narrow majority of consumers is now pessimistic about the outlook.
Market economists noted a fall in the volume of retail sales in NSW in the final three months of last year, warning this may reflect falling house prices. Sales remain strong in Victoria, where house prices are also falling, but Sydney has been ahead of Melbourne throughout the housing cycle.
The Reserve Bank believes employm­ent will remain strong, wages will lift and households will keep spending, but acknowledges that a consumer retreat is the biggest domestic risk to the outlook.
It is fertile ground for Labor. Many will agree with its pitch that low wages growth is leaving them falling further behind, although its promise to restore penalty rates would make little discernible difference to the national outcome.
Personal income tax cuts are the only answer either side has to falling real incomes and they will be at the centre of the election campaigns for both parties.If consumer spending continues to ­soften, the economic argument for personal tax cuts will match the political case.
