 The dollar took a hit yesterday after the Reserve Bank conceded it may need to cut interest rates again if the economy slows more than expected amid “increased risks”.
The comments resulted in the dollar diving more than one <loc>US</loc> cent, hitting a two-week low of US71.33c in early European trading, despite the bank still expecting “reasonable” economic growth and saying the economy should be able to handle the ­“inevitable correction” in house prices.
The currency had jumped a day earlier after RBA governor Philip Lowe outlined slightly weaker economic forecasts — due to be detailed its Monetary Policy Statement tomorrow — which still seemed consistent with a so-called “tightening bias” despite growing market speculation of a rate cut this year.
The sharemarket hit a four-month high yesterday, with the S&P/ASX 200 rising 0.3 per cent to 6026.1 points.
In a wide-ranging speech to the National Press Club in <loc>Sydney</loc> yesterday, Dr Lowe said the outlook for interest rates was now “more evenly balanced” and growth could be weaker than ­expected.
“There are scenarios where the next move in the cash rate is up and other scenarios where it is down,” Dr Lowe said.
“In the event of a sustained increased in the unemployment rate and a lack of further progress towards the inflation objective, lower interest rates might be appropriate at some point,” he added, echoing a dovish shift by the <loc>US</loc> Federal Reserve after its own board meeting last week.
“We have the flexibility to do this if needed.” It was a major shift in interest rate guidance from the central bank, which has held its official cash rate at a record low 1.5 per cent since August 2016. In the minutes of its December board meeting it said “the next move in the cash rate was more likely to be an increase than a decrease”.
JPMorgan <loc>Australia</loc> chief economist Sally Auld said the RBA’s new flexibility on rates suggested the central bank felt “there is enough to worry about right now such that a narrative which affirms that the next move in rates is likely up is no longer appropriate”.
In her view, the RBA would only cut interest rates in the first half of 2019 if global growth slowed further or Australian data suggested weaker-than-expected growth in the December quarter and the prospect of more softness in the March quarter, but the prospect was “now a higher probability than it was”.
