 By VIVEK KAUL
Mumbai, the city I live in, has its share of horse-racing enthusiasts. Over the last weekend, I met a friend, who happens to be one such enthusiast. Among other things, he got talking about horses and how he planned to go to the racecourse on Sunday to watch a race featuring his favourite horse. He just wanted to watch the race and had no plans of betting on it.
Sir Cecil was the horse. The horse had started in eight races and won all eight, not having lost a single one and hence, had an enviable record. Given this, he was the favourite and was expected to win the biggest race in India, which was scheduled on Sunday.
This conversation happened on late Saturday evening and I forgot all about this, until I was reading through the Mumbai Mirror on Monday morning. I saw that a horse called Star Superior had won India's biggest race and by doing so had gone on to avenge three defeats suffered at the hands of Sir Cecil. Dear Reader, you must be wondering why I am suddenly talking about horses in a column which is supposed to be dealing in economics. Allow me to explain.
In their book A Crisis of Beliefs-Investor Psychology and Financial Fragility, Nicola Gennaioli and Andrei Shleifer write: "When investors expect stock market returns to be high, they put money into equity mutual funds... Investors expect high returns on the stock market when past returns have been high."
How is this related to the horse story? The point is that after eight wins my friend expected Sir Cecil to win the ninth race as well; the stock market investors behave in the same way. They invest in the stock market, only after the stock prices have rallied quite a bit. Having seen the stock prices rally, the investors believe that the prices will continue to go up in the days to come. And this gets them to invest in the stock market directly or indirectly through equity mutual funds.
Let's take the example of equity mutual funds in India. Between April 2009 and December 2018, a total of Rs 4,02,530 crore has been invested in them. The interesting thing is that a bulk of this money, Rs 2,39,632 crore, has come between April 2017 and December 2018, a period of 21 months. Of course, a bulk of the rally in stock prices had already happened before April 2017.
It is like my friend expected Sir Cecil to win the ninth race, just because the horse had run and won eight races before that. Similarly, investors started really opening their purses to invest in equity mutual funds after April 2017, once they had seen stock prices already rally for a few years. This phenomenon has been observed in real estate investing as well. Real estate markets in India rallied for a decade between 2002 and 2011. After that they have been rather dull. But there were investors who until 2015 and 2016, continued to believe that real estate prices will go up. Such was the belief in the trend continuing.
There are other areas as well where this happens. As Gennaioli and Shleifer write: "When corporate managers expect high earnings growth, they plan more investment... Corporate managers and analysts expect high earnings growth when past earnings growth has been high."
A similar phenomenon plays out with respect to the economy in general as well. As Gennaioli and Shelifer write: "Good macroeconomic news makes good future outcomes more representative, and therefore overweighted in judgements about future states of the world."
This explains to a large extent why economists and analysts are very bad at predicting an economic crisis. Like my friend expected Sir Cecil to win, economists and analysts expect the good times in the economy to continue. But that as we often see doesn't really turn out to be the case.
