 MUMBAI—India's central bank cut its key lending rate Thursday, surprising economists at a time when the autonomy and reliability of the central bank and other authorities that help manage growth and jobs data in Asia's third-largest economy are being questioned.
The Reserve Bank of India lowered the rate for the first time in a year and a half and sparked expectations of further cuts by paring its inflation forecast at its regular monetary policy meeting. Economists had predicted the central bank would hold interest rates steady to demonstrate vigilance about inflationary pressures from increased government spending, which was proposed last week in an interim budget. National polls are scheduled to be completed in India by mid-May, and historically New Delhi has often blown out its budget in election years.
Some economists worry the decision to start a new easing cycle earlier than expected could signal an era in which the RBI, based in Mumbai, is more likely to bow to demands from politicians and government officials in New Delhi who have called for more measures to boost growth.
"I think this does raise questions about the RBI's independence, particularly in going straight from a tightening stance to a rate cut," said Mark Williams, chief Asia economist at Capital Economics. "It's clear that the new governor has made all the difference."
It was the first monetary policy meeting for RBI Gov. Shaktikanta Das, a former government bureaucrat who took the helm of the central bank in December . His predecessor, Urjit Patel, resigned for what he said were personal reasons after trying to push back against political pressure.
Mr. Das pledged to uphold the independence of the central bank after being appointed in December. The rate easing comes ahead of elections in which Prime Minister Narendra Modi's Bharatiya Janata Party will seek to remain in power by convincing voters that the economy has thrived under its leadership.
Lower interest rates usually make it cheaper for consumers and industry to borrow, potentially boosting growth.
Finance Minister Piyush Goyal welcomed the rate cut, saying on Twitter that it "will give a boost to the economy, lead to affordable credit for small businesses, homebuyers etc. and further boost employment opportunities."
Mr. Das said Thursday that the decision to cut rates was taken because inflation seems to be in check. He said the government's spending plans—which include big tax breaks for the middle class and cash handouts to farmers —had been taken into account. "The impact of various budget proposals and other developments have been factored into our projections," he said at a news conference. He didn't respond to a question about whether the RBI came under pressure to cut rates.
Meanwhile, Mr. Modi's government has come under fire from critics and opposition politicians who say it has been tinkering with indicators to make India's economy appear healthier.
Some skeptics, including official statisticians , have charged New Delhi with inflating gross domestic product and concealing unfavorable inflation data. A top government statistician quit last month complaining the government had delayed the release of unemployment figures and recalculated GDP figures. The unemployment figures, which still haven't been made public, set India's unemployment at 6.1% which is a 45-year high, according to a government official who has seen the figures. The government says the report isn't finalized yet.
Meanwhile, GDP numbers have been repeatedly recalculated under Mr. Modi's watch. India started using a new base and method to calculate GDP in 2015, which greatly boosted the growth under Mr. Modi . Historical figures were recalculated in the past year using the same new methodology. At first the new historical numbers showed India performing better under the previous government. Since then, there have been changes that put growth under Mr. Modi on top .
Gov. Das's appointment came after months of wrangling between the previous governor, Mr. Patel, and the government, which had called on the bank to release some of its surplus funds and ease lending restrictions on state-run banks weighed down by nonperforming loans. While Mr. Patel was praised for keeping inflation in check, he was criticized by the government for not doing enough to boost growth.
Related Coverage
* India Beats Back Accusations It Cooked the Books to Boost Election Prospects (Feb. 1, 2019)
* With Cash Handouts, India Takes Step Toward Universal Basic Income (Feb. 1, 2019)
* Indian Farmers Despair, Planting Seeds of Doubt About Modi's Re-Election (Jan. 14, 2019)
* India Names Former Public Servant as Central Bank Governor (Dec. 11, 2018)
* India Goes Back to the Future—Again—With Economic Growth Revisions (Nov. 29, 2018)
* Investors Concerned Raghuram Rajan's Departure Could Rattle Markets (June 19, 2016)
Since December, the RBI has been rolling out policies that more closely resemble what New Delhi wants: buying more government bonds to release money into the banking system and easing lending restrictions on some large banks.
Mr. Patel wasn't the first bank governor to resign after tensions with the government. Raghuram Rajan in 2016 returned to academia in the U.S. after being criticized by some politicians and business leaders for being too outspoken.
Sonal Varma, a Singapore-based economist for Nomura, said it was unexpected that two of the monetary-policy committee members would change their stance from ruling out any cut at the last policy meeting to supporting a cut in interest rates in this one.
"There have been many such attacks on the RBI's independence and questions about the independence, and it's varied across different governors," Ms. Varma said. "This is not new, and it's up to the RBI to prove otherwise."
Write to Corinne Abrams at corinne.abrams@wsj.com and Debiprasad Nayak at debi.nayak@wsj.com
