 SENIOR economist William Adams insisted that the EU has sided with the Republic of Ireland on Brexit and is willing to sacrifice economic growth to ensure the Brexit backstop issue is not changed.
During an interview with CNBC senior economist of PNC William Adam revealed that the EU had sided with Ireland over the other EU member states because they would be more greatly impacted from Brexit. Mr Adams emphasised that the EU and Ireland’s highest priority was maintaining peace between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland. He said: “For the EU, I think the economic interests and the political interests point in opposite directions, which is why the EU is taking such a hardline approach.
Related articles John McDonnell challenges claim anti-semitism is a 'SMEAR campaign' EU PLAN BACKFIRES: Brexiteer claims Tusk made NO DEAL more likely
“The EU has decided in this negotiation that they are going to stand with Ireland which has the most at stake in the Brexit renegotiation.
“Ireland’s number one priority has been maintaining the Good Friday Agreement and for that, they need to maintain free movement for the Irish dual citizens who live in Northern Ireland across the border into the Republic of Ireland.
“Because of that, I think Ireland has definitely recognised that Brexit would be a big blow to their economy.
“And recognised it would be a lesser blow to other economies across the EU.
William Adams has said the EU have sided with Ireland over EU states on Brexit
“The peace in Northern Ireland is a higher priority for them.”
Today The European Commission sharply cut its forecasts for economic growth in the euro zone this year and next because of an expected slowdown in the largest countries of the bloc caused by global trade tensions and growing public debt.
In its quarterly economic forecasts, the EU executive also revised down its estimates for the inflation in the 19 country currency bloc next year, which now is expected to be lower than forecast by the European Central Bank, likely complicating the bank's plans for an interest rate hike this year.
The Commission said eurozone growth will slow to 1.3 percent this year from 1.9 percent in 2018 and is expected to rebound in 2020 to 1.6 percent.
The new estimates are less optimistic than the Commission's previous forecasts, released in November when Brussels expected the eurozone to grow 1.9 percent this year and 1.7 percent in 2020.
Growth in the 27 nation European Union, without Britain, is expected to slow to 1.5 percent this year from 2.1 percent in 2018. Next year, the bloc is forecast to expand by 1.8 percent.
All countries of the European Union are poised to continue growing, with the bloc expected to post its seventh consecutive year of expansion, but the larger member states will break significantly.
With tensions still relatively high between the UK and Brussels, further exacerbated by Donald Tusk’s comments, the likelihood of a satisfying deal in time for March 29 has decreased.
Theresa May today is in Brussels to speak with Michel Barnier and Jean-Claude Juncker on renegotiating the backstop and the overall Brexit withdrawal agreement.
