 Trump isn’t the first president to lean on the bank
US Federal Reserve chairman Jerome Powell was probably relieved he wasn’t singled out in President Donald Trump’s State of the Union address this week.
Trump’s criticism of the Fed has died down in recent months, no doubt because Powell, after repeatedly signalling a determination to lift policy rates, had updated the Fed’s guidance to “patience” and “data dependence”.
Trump’s public dressings-down of Federal Reserve chairmen Janet Yellen and more recently Powell have drawn disapproval. But central bankers in the US have long come under intense pressure from presidents to juice up the economy. Trump’s behaviour is quite tame by comparison.
President Harry Truman slammed Fed chairman Thomas B. McCabe in the early 1950s. “If the Federal Reserve board is going to pull the rug from under the Treasury we certainly are faced with a most serious situation … that is exactly what Mr Stalin wants,” Truman wrote, furious that the interest rates on US government bonds were a testing 2.5 per cent. Trump is yet to accuse Powell of secretly conducting monetary policy to help Xi Jinping or Vladimir Putin.
As Trump has found with Powell, whom he hand-picked, removing a chairman and picking someone else doesn’t mean compliance. Truman ultimately forced McCabe to resign and installed Treasury official William McChesney Martin, who went on to run the Fed from 1951 to 1970, even longer than Alan Greenspan would years later. Martin refused to play ball, too, putting inflation reduction ahead of the US government’s demands for cheap fin­ance. Years later, Truman would call Martin a traitor on the street in New York.
The world’s monetary system started breaking down in the late 1960s, when the cost of the Vietnam War and Lyndon Johnson’s Great Society social programs put immense pressure on the US government’s budget and inflation started to rise.
Johnson wanted interest rates to stay low. In 1964 “when the Fed made a show of resistance, Johnson summoned Martin to his Texas ranch, and physically shoved him around his living room, yelling in his face, ‘boys are dying in Vietnam and Bill Martin doesn’t care’,” writes Sebastian Mallaby in his brilliant history of the Fed and Alan Greenspan, The Man Who Knew.
If Trump’s dinner with Powell at the White House a few days ago was as rough, it would be known. His administration leaks notoriously.
“As inflation increased, the Martin Fed began following a tighter monetary policy in late 1965. President Johnson greatly opposed this for fear his domestic agenda would be sabotaged and he put considerable pressure,” says Michael Bordo, an eminent American monetary economist, in a recent paper on the unravelling of the Bretton Woods agreement in the 1970s.
Richard Nixon became president in 1969 and appointed Arthur Burns to replace Martin. Nixon pressured Burns to loosen policy in the early 1970s, which he did. Nixon said: “I respect his independence. However, I hope that independently he will conclude that my views are the ones that should be followed”.
Mallaby writes that Burns, who was quite close to Milton Friedman, the famous Chicago economist, was “ruthlessly bullied by Richard Nixon’s henchmen”.
Friedman was furious with his former colleague for becoming convinced that inflation was caused by the push and pull of demand factors such as union wage demands, rather than the growth of the money supply itself.
More recently, presidents Ronald Reagan, Bill Clinton and Barack Obama — the first two taken by the supposed prescience of Alan Greenspan — have been kind to Fed chairs. Even Jimmy Carter was anti and dumped Burns’ successor, William Miller, after 18 months for not displaying sufficient political loyalty.
Nixon finally junked the Bretton Woods agreement in 1971, which had tied national currencies to the US dollar and the dollar in turn to gold at a fixed price of $US35 an ounce. France dropped out in 1967 and started converting its holdings of US dollars into gold en masse, infuriating the US government. The US had managed to hold it together until then, even threatening West Germany it would withdraw its troops if the country followed France’s lead.
Trump’s treatment of the Fed chairman, however, isn’t the only common strand with previous eras. Huge US government deficits characterised the 1960s and 70s, as they do now. Inflation ultimately eroded these public debts before the debt explosion under Reagan. US public debt is headed towards 100 per cent of US GDP, much larger than in the 1970s.
Nixon, a Republican predecessor of Trump, also took a populist mercantilist position on trade for domestic political reasons. “President Nixon blamed the rest of the world instead of correcting US monetary and fiscal policies,” Bordo writes.
Nixon imposed a 10 per cent surcharge on all US imports to help what he saw as an excessively large US trade deficit. “The surcharge was viewed as a strategic measure to force the others to come to the bargaining table,” writes Bordo.
Trump’s tariffs on China are similarly part of a bargaining strategy to reduce the US trade deficit.Given Nixon was ultimately threatened with impeachment, Trump will hope the similarities end there.
