 NEW DELHi: The six-member monetary policy committee (MPC) headed by Governor Shaktikanta Das will decide on the policy rate on Thursday at 11.45 am. This would be former economic affairs secretary-turned Governor, Shaktinanta Das' first policy review.
Most economists expect the committee to keep the repo rate unchanged at 6.5 per cent due to sticky core inflation but believe a change in the policy stance to 'neutral' from 'calibrated tightening' is likely in the wake of dovish US Federal Reserve, stable crude oil prices, muted inflation readings and uncertainty over global growth.
A few though see plenty of reasons for a 25 basis points cut.
Inflation has averaged 3 per cent in the last five months, undershooting RBI's expectation. This is at a time when the economic growth is estimated to grow at 6.8 per cent for the second half of FY19.
Economists noted that the central bank had in its last policy review mentioned that with both inflation and growth developing ''soft spots", the appropriate risk management policy was to wait and watch and better assess situations.
Foreign brokerage Nomura is expecting 5-1 vote to keep the repo rate unchanged, even as it sees change in policy stance to reflect balanced growth-inflation risks.
The brokerage expects RBI to view the recently announced Budget as inflationary and flag this as an upside risk to inflation. "The expansionary fiscal impulse, at the margin, negates the need for the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) to consider monetary easing at this stage," it said.
"With the last two months data continuing to show slowdown and inflation expectation continuing to be benign, we expect RBI to be in a better position to change stance in this policy," said Edelweiss Securities. RBI, it says, may change stance first and then cut rate, thereby smoothening expectations.
"However, we believe the slowing local growth is a good backdrop to cut policy rates," the brokerage said.
But BofA-ML said high real rates are hurting growth, adding that the RBI MPC's inflation risks are expectedly proving overdone.Besides, it does not think fundamentals support high core inflation. Meanwhile, a fiscal deficit target of 3.4 per cent for FY20 is less than what the Street was anticipating earlier.
"An RBI rate cut should support rupee as FPI equity investments are 7 times of debt. Global rate pressures are also receding: our US economists see their 2019 50bp rate hike call less likely with the Fed turning dovish," the brokerage said.
