 David Malpass, a China hawk who is US President Donald Trump's nominee to become the World Bank's new president, will ­continue to play a "very important part" in trade negotiations with Beijing, according to senior ­American officials.
Malpass, undersecretary for international affairs at the US Treasury, would travel to China next week with US Trade Representative Robert Lighthizer and Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin for the next round of negotiations, the officials said.
The former chief economist of Bear Stearns, the Wall Street ­investment bank that collapsed at the onset of the 2008 global financial crisis, is a sceptic of the World Bank. He has been vocal in his ­opposition to multilateralism and has figured prominently in the negotiations with China, which reconvened at the cabinet level in Washington last week.
The scheduling of more talks was one of the only tangible outcomes of last week's discussions, which culminated in an Oval ­Office meeting between the Chinese delegates and Trump and a promise from Vice-Premier Liu He of a one-time, 5 million metric tonne purchase of soybeans.
This was dismissed by observers as a ­token.
Malpass, 62, would continue to be a part of efforts to reach an agreement by March 1, said one official, referring to the end of the 90-day window agreed upon in December, after which US tariffs will rise in the absence of a deal.
Appearing to temper expectations that a deal was a certainty, the senior official said: "March 1 is the deadline where we believe a deal will, you know - we'll be ­focused on trying to get [one] achieved by that date."
Malpass is also expected to drive a hard line with China should he be elected president of the World Bank - set up in 1944 to fund the redevelopment of Europe after the second world war.
In 2018, it loaned US$1.82 ­billion to China, the world's ­second largest economy, for projects ranging from transport and urban development to energy and water ­management.
"China has plenty of resources, and it doesn't make sense to have money borrowed in the US, using the US government guarantee, going into lending in China for a country that's gotten other resources and access to capital markets," Malpass said in 2017 at a Council on Foreign Relations event. At the White House ­announcement of his nomination on Wednesday, Malpass made no mention of China.
"I am very optimistic that we can achieve breakthroughs to ­create growth abroad that will help us combat extreme poverty," he said as Trump looked on.
One senior administration ­official said Malpass' tenure at the World Bank would focus on changes such as improving debt transparency and updating its lending programmes. Such changes would be designed to focus the country programmes "on those countries that are the poorest and most in need of financial resources", the official said.
This would be a continuation of efforts, already begun by the Trump administration to rein in lending to China, which is itself engaged in lending to other ­nations through its "Belt and Road ­Initiative".
"We are working with allies and like-minded countries to guide the [multilateral development banks] away from what could be viewed as endorsement of China's geopolitical ambitions," Malpass said in written ­testimony to a Senate subcommittee in November.
The World Bank could be ­effective in "helping vulnerable countries better understand the risks and implications" of accepting China's "excessive lending", he wrote.
> Battlefront B3
