 It has been a long time since professional sports produced a twisted situation with as much at stake as what's happening in the NBA right now. A team with a superstar player under contract through the end of next season stands to benefit by telling him not to bother coming to work.
Anthony Davis publicly requested a trade. The New Orleans Pelicans decided against dealing him before this week's trade deadline. Now the most absurd outcome is their optimal scenario: They're better off not playing their best player.
It's irrationally rational. Their $25 million employee is more valuable to them on the bench than on the court.
"Davis and the Pelicans are going to get negative utility from every game that he plays," said Purdue University economist Timothy Bond. "It is really strange."
The Pelicans have already made it clear the idea is too strange for them. Not playing Davis proved to be easier in theory than the cold, awkward world of reality, and they said on Thursday they plan to honor the wishes of their franchise player by keeping Davis in the lineup for the rest of the season.
It might have been impossible for them to get away with such a drastic approach even if they'd tried. The backlash from other players, agents, fans, the union and the league office would have been ferocious. The NBA is an entertainment business that's richer than ever because of billion-dollar television contracts and paying fans who prefer to watch basketball players actually playing basketball.
"The Pelicans want to preserve the integrity of the game and align our organization with NBA policies," New Orleans general manager Dell Demps said in a statement released by the team. "We believe Anthony playing upholds the values that are in the best interest of the NBA and its fans."
But is that the smartest course of action for the Pelicans?
They found themselves in this basketball limbo when Davis asked for a trade last week, with almost 18 months left on his contract, making it known that not even a lifetime supply of beignets would keep him in New Orleans. His demand put an enormous amount of pressure on the Pelicans to dump the 25-year-old player with generational talent in the prime of his career. The rest of the league reacted appropriately: by freaking out for the next 10 days.
The Los Angeles Lakers reportedly offered everything but LeBron James and the statues outside their arena for Davis, but the Pelicans resisted their overtures long enough to get past Thursday's trade deadline. Now they have no choice but to deal him this summer instead of letting him walk and losing him for nothing.
But they're in purgatory until then with an odd sort of problem: They're stuck with one of the league's top players for the rest of the season.
The Pelicans have plenty of reasons to hide Davis's jersey. They are currently 5.5 games back of the No. 8 seed in the Western Conference. The only thing they have any real chance of winning this season is the draft lottery, and they could boost the probability of landing the No. 1 pick and Zion Williamson by taking the logical strategic approach: losing.
There are times when it's worth ruminating about whether it's appropriate for a team in the league's smallest market to put out an inferior product over the short term in hopes of long-term success. This is not one of those times. The Pelicans have every incentive to tank.
They already know there are two critical decisions over the next few months that will shape their future: which player to draft and which trade package to accept. If they only cared about being pragmatic, they would prioritize losing games and protecting Davis's value. And they could accomplish both goals by keeping him in bubblewrap. For the last seven years, they hoped that playing Davis would bring a reward for being good: a championship. For the next two months, they could not play Davis and get a reward for being bad: a top draft pick.
The issue is that real human beings are involved, though, and it's not hard to understand why Davis wouldn't support the plan that happens to make the most sense for the Pelicans. He still wants to play basketball.
But he's also missed more than a full season of games in his young career with an astonishing variety of injuries to his back, chest, head, fingers, toes, groin, hands, knees, shoulders, ankles, quads and both hips. The worst thing he can do now is suffer a catastrophic injury that lingers into next season. So what could he do instead? Take a two-week vacation. Take a two-month vacation! Kondo his home. Listen to all the podcasts. Anything but the very thing he's paid to do.
It's worth discussing how the Pelicans will handle Davis even after they've reached their decision because he's soon to be at the center of the decade's most significant NBA transaction. Where he plays next year might change the competitive landscape of the entire league.
The Lakers see him as elixir for LeBron James. The Celtics have visions of him raising a title banner with Kyrie Irving. The Knicks are trying to make people forget their long, unfortunate history of being the Knicks.
But the Pelicans were always going to be in a stronger negotiating position after the season, no matter how much organizational stress they had to endure first, because they want a bidding war between the league's big markets this summer. That's when the Celtics could get involved and dangle Jayson Tatum, the Knicks could hit the draft lottery and include Williamson, and the Lakers could get desperate enough to sweeten their deal.
The only way for the Pelicans to lose their leverage is for Davis to lose his value. And the only way that happens is if they remove the bubblewrap. It's a bizarre predicament even for people who are used to analyzing the vagaries of human behavior.
"I'm trying to come up with an example," said Yale economist Florian Ederer. "Do you watch that show 'Silicon Valley'?"
There is a character in the HBO satirical comedy known as Big Head who's exiled to the roof of his tech company and tasked with a crucial job as he waits for his stock to gestate: doing nothing. The term for how people like Big Head spend their time is "rest and vest." And the Pelicans could take some inspiration from Big Head and the unwanted castaways on the roof.
He's a useful reminder of the peculiar strategy they might have to embrace by the time the season is over: making Anthony Davis the NBA's most coveted rest-and-vest.
Write to Ben Cohen at ben.cohen@wsj.com
