 It is not easy to translate the ­Hebrew word davka. It means something like “despite it all” and “because of”, but with a sense of deliberate precision: I was at home all day, but the delivery man came davka during the half-hour when I was out.
It can connote an intent to irrit­ate: my girlfriend knows we disagree about politics, but she alway­s davka brings it up. In 2003 Ariel Sharon, a pugnacious forme­r prime minister, cited a young American explaining the word to friends back home: “Davka means doing or thinking something both in spite of and becaus­e of a given situation.” Curiously, Israeli Prime Min­is­te­r Benjamin Netanyahu has chosen as his sloga­n for the April 9 election “Davka Netanyahu”.
In December, Israeli police recommended that Netanyahu be indicted for bribery and breach of trust. The Prime Minister says the charges are a witch hunt by lefty prosecutors and journalists.
Many supporters of his hawkish Likud party come from ­religious or working-class backgrounds, and many are Sephardic Jews, descended from immig­rants from the Arab world, rather than Ashkenazi Jews, who trace their roots to Europe and are typicall­y richer.
Netanyahu’s davka is an invit­a­tion to his supporters to stick a finger in the eye of the elite: vote for me not just despite the corruption charges, but because of them.
This populist way of thinking is becoming familiar all over the world. At its heart lies the politics of resentment. Backers of US President Don­ald Trump call themselves “deplorables”, embracing a term Hillary Clinton used to describe them. In Britain, Brexit supporters suggest that, in case of a second referendum, the Leave campaign should employ the cry “Tell them again”. Such slogans appeal not to the merits of the cause, but to supporters’ resentme­nt at being a target of condescension.
The great philosopher of resentm­ent was Friedrich Nietzsche, who thought it had a lot to do with Jews. In On the Genealogy of Morality, he describes the polit­ics of resentment as a Jewish invention that lies at the core of Judaeo-Christian ethics.
In pagan morality, according to Nietzsche, the good is synonymous with the excellent and the powerful: rulers and gods are good because they are beautiful and strong. Judaism and Christianity, resentful of pagan rule, inverte­d this morality. They saw the weak masses as good, whereas precisely (davka!) the strong rulers were evil. This “slave moralit­y”, Nietzsche thought, was behind all of Western civilisation. He detested it.
Nietzsche’s account of moral­ity’s evolution is a fascinating mess with little relationship to ­reality. However, his analysis of resentment was picked up by thinkers such as Sigmund Freud and Hannah Arendt, and has becom­e crucial to the understanding of populism and authoritarianism. Still, it is strange that the politics of resentment should be employe­d davka by Netan­yahu, an ­unlikely underdog.
The scion of a renowned Ashken­azi family, Netanyahu grew up in the US before returning to Israel to serve in an elite commando unit, a crucial distinction in a society where military service affects social class. He has been a dominant figure in Israeli politics for more than two decade­s. He and Likud have helped pull Israel’s political centre in a hawkish direction, winning power and all but ending the prospects for a Palestinian state.
The real political outcasts in Israel are surely Likud’s oppon­ents, the remnants of the peace movement. They are the ones who must urge their dwindling band of supporters to continue hoping for the seemingly impossible, davka.THE ECONOMIST
