 Mayor Carol Sparks says Glen Innes could become the "renewable energy capital" of Australia to fight persistently high rural unemployment.
She also stressed the importance of individuals getting the skills they need to compete in the modern labour market.
Her comments come in response to new stats crunched by an economist at Conus which show Glen Innes has the among the worst unemployment rates of any local government area in NSW.
They show an unemployment rate of about 10.3 per cent in Glen Innes. New England also has a relatively low participation rate of 59 per cent. That means fewer people are in work or looking for it and a higher proportion of that group can't find a job. The rate is over double the state average of 4.5 per cent and has been trending upwards for a year.
Ms Sparks said that Glen Innes has had a consistently elevated unemployment rate for years. But paradoxically there are also half a dozen job vacancies on council's website that haven't being filled, from high skilled work to low skill.
Local government is probably the single largest employer in Glen Innes. Cr Sparks said getting a good education can make the difference between a good job and no job.
"I encourage young people to go down to TAFE and see what's available for them and see if they might be able to make a career out of attending a TAFE course," she said.
Gone are the days where young people could reliably find work in high-paying low-skill mass employers like forestry, Ford or Holden. That means young people need skills to get a start in industry.
"People need to be creative too in their thinking about their future too and their money-making.
"Things are changing in the world, the IT side of things - people are skilling up more in that area."
Ms Sparks points to renewable energy as another long-term solution, pointing to the potential for Glen Innes to become the "renewable energy capital of Australia". She says the council can promote new renewable generation by adding solar cells as shade above carparks and in other ways.
"In that renewable energy field I believe there's a lot of scope for employment," she said.
Council also applies for federal grants in hopes of funding regular upgrades to roads and other infrastructure. That has a knock-on impact on employment. It was successful just last week in winning a quarter of a million federal dollars for three new projects in Glen Innes and Deepwater.
Glen Innes Severn shire has among the worst unemployment rates of any shire in NSW according to new analysis by an economist at Conus.
According to Conus economist Pete Faulkner 10.3 per cent of citizens of the Glen Innes local government area are looking for work but can't find it. And the New England area has a relatively low participation rate as well; just 59 per cent of us either have a job for at least one hour a week or are actively looking.
The rate is more than double the state average of 4.5 per cent. Unemployment has been increasing since September 2017.
All statistics are based on Conus LGA figures, which are a seasonal trend based on data produced by the department of employment. Their latest data is from September.
"At the moment there's no sign that that's likely to reverse," said Mr Faulkner.
"You tend to find that with very small regional council areas, you either get very high levels of unemployment or you get very, very low.
"Because people say - look if I'm living somewhere where unemployment is so high - they'll simply move and therefore you end up with nobody being unemployed in some very small regional areas because they can't afford to be unemployed. If I can't get a job there I go somewhere else."
Glen Innes also probably has a low participation rate. The participation rate measures the number of people either looking for work or working at least one hour a week.
New England has a participation rate of 59.2 per cent, trending upwards. The average for regional NSW is 60.1%. That's much lower than the average for Greater Sydney where 67.5 per cent of people are participating in the jobs market.
