 A pause in tightening by the US Federal Reserve could be a boost to emerging markets as investors look beyond China-related ­securities for growth, according to the Institute of International ­Finance.
In a research report, Robin Brooks, the trade group's chief economist, and associate economist Jonathan Fortun said much of the pickup into emerging market stocks and bonds this year had been driven by China, but that had broadened in recent weeks, particularly in equities.
The Fed's recently changed stance on further rate increases could "reignite a wall of money" into emerging markets, according to the report.
"What made [the January 29 to 30 Fed] meeting so notable was how much of the Fed's long-standing narrative was dropped, including the tightening bias, the [quantitative tightening] path and risk assessment," Brooks and ­Fortun said. "Perhaps the most important change was the addition of 'patient' to the statement, a loaded term in Fed parlance.
"The last time 'patient' made an appearance was in December 2014, when it replaced 'considerable time' and signalled a shift to cautious tightening.
"'Patient' stuck around for the January 2015 meeting, was dropped in March and the Fed eventually raised rates for the first time in December 2015. 'Patient', in other words, signals a prolonged pause."
The economists said they expected the Fed to hold off on any further rate rises until the second half of the year, when they forecast two.
In a separate note this week, Jon Harrison, the managing director of emerging markets macro strategy at TS Lombard, said the outlook for growth in China and the timing of when further stimulus by Beijing affected the economy were the biggest risks to emerging market investors.
As the trade war escalated last year, China's economy grew at its weakest pace since 1990, with a gross domestic product growth rate at 6.6 per cent.
"We met 20 institutional ­investors in London in late January during our China macro marketing trip," Harrison said. "In general, there was greater optimism than during our previous visit in November, ­centred on the prospect of new stimulus. We caution first that stimulus policy is not yet sufficiently strong to stabilise growth, and second that there is a growing risk of deflation."
Richard Titherington, the emerging markets and Asia-Pacific equities chief investment officer at J.P. Morgan Asset Management, said China had a greater incentive to resolve trade disputes.
The US has set a March deadline for the world's two largest economies to reach an agreement on trade. If no deal is reached, US President Donald Trump has threatened to raise tariffs on about US$200 billion of Chinese imports to 25 per cent.
"The trade dispute has hurt China, not just in terms of the stock market declines, but also consumer confidence and company [capital expenditure]," Titherington said. "With China under pressure, we expect them to seek compromises. Any success on those fronts would be relatively positive for [emerging markets]."
> Macroscope B8
