 Are Brexiteers correct to suggest the EU protects the interests of its large companies while disregarding those of its consumers? This week's blockage of the proposed rail merger between Germany's Siemens and France's Alstom suggests they are very wrong indeed. The EU's Competition Commission has retained the appetite to fight against excessive corporate power, while the US decades ago gave up even pretending to do so. Siemens and Alstom wanted to combine their railway-equipment businesses to build the sort of "champion" that could compete with China's CRRC. There is logic to their case, given that CRRC is itself the result of a mega-merger, and its relationship with the Chinese state helps to give it an edge over others. But Margrethe Vestager, the European commissioner for competition, held firm. She judged that the merged entity would have too much power in the European market, which would tend to push up prices for rail passengers. Monopoly power leads to a bad deal for consumers: that is one of the few unambiguous messages the economics profession delivers. Theory says that businesses in competitive industries earn normal profits, while monopolies can use their power to earn supernormal profits. Supernormal profit is sometimes known as rent, because it accrues as a result of a privileged position rather than any work done. And the message on monopoly has been consistent since economics was invented. One of the most quoted pieces from Adam Smith's Wealth Of Nations is the following: "People of the same trade seldom meet together, even for merriment and diversion, but the conversation ends in a conspiracy against the public, or in some contrivance to raise prices." So it is reassuring that the EU continues to fight against monopoly. It is extremely worrying that the US, which for most of its existence was heroically and obsessively antimonopoly, is becoming more and more relaxed about it. Last summer the US Supreme Court made the final ruling on the question of whether creditcard companies were restricting competition by blocking retailers from directing customers towards cheaper payment methods. Card companies serve both retailers and the final customer, and the case has hinged on whether high charges to the former are offset by benefits to the latter. The lower courts ruled that the burden was on the card companies to prove that benefits to consumers outweighed the harm to retailers. But the Supreme Court ruled that the burden was on the Department of Justice to prove that retailers were being harmed. Many analysts argue that this ruling forms part of a growing body of evidence showing that the US has gone soft on the abuse of market power. The researchers Germán Gutiérrez and Thomas Philippon concluded that European markets in the 1990s became more competitive than US ones. They believe Europe now has lower levels of market concentration, less of a problem with excess profits, and fewer issues with regulatory barriers to entry. It is no coincidence that the reversal came after the European Commission gained responsibility for enforcing competition policy in 1989. These researchers believe its supranational nature has given it a distance from the vested interests that reduced competition in Europe previously and in the US now. The economist Joseph Stiglitz has become concerned that the US is now a rent-extracting economy. He presents many convincing reasons why this has happened. One is that the mathematics presented by economists arguing in favour of mergers has become so complex that it is almost impossible to refute. And one could add to this that mergers and acquisitions earn fortunes for bankers, which allows them to pour billions into the lobby machine to help get the mergers through the anti-trust process. Economists appear to be belatedly waking up to the problems of excessive market power, which could be a causal factor in many of the economic ills that we are now experiencing. For example, the problem of stagnating wages in the industrialised world could owe as much to the acceptance of an increase in corporate power, as to globalisation itself. It has recently been established that the share of economic output that goes to labour has been declining steadily in many countries since the 1970s. What was not noticed until quite recently was that this trend was mirrored by a rise in the share of profits in overall economic output over the same period. If this rise in profits is the result of increased inventiveness and efficiency, then it makes all parties better off. If it is the result of increased market power, then it makes society worse off. The US last ran into a significant market-power problem when the "robber barons" of the late 19th century amalgamated small, competitive producers into large, monopolistic ones. Andrew Carnegie did this in the steel industry and Jay Gould did it for railroads. But the authorities responded aggressively by passing anti-trust legislation in the form of the Sherman Act of 1890 and the Clayton Act of 1914. This legislation was also used aggressively, notably with the breakup of John D. Rockefeller's Standard Oil into 34 companies in 1911. The will to act against trusts remained strong until the 1970s. It was then argued, perhaps with some justification, that mergers were needed to clear out the dead wood in order to face competition from the economies of Europe and Japan. Now that the US has many highly successful companies with plenty of market power, it seems reasonable to ask whether the country should go back to its old trust-busting ways. aongusb@aol.com CREDIT: business commentary Aongus Buckley
