 A GERMAN economist has urged his country to do everything they can to keep the UK in the EU, as Brexit would be a “disaster” for Germany.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel and economist Hans-Werner Sinn
Hans-Werner Sinn is the former President of the Ifo Institute for Economic Research and is on the German economy ministry’s advisory panel. Speaking at a conference on Wednesday, he expressed his concern over Brexit. Dr Sinn said: “Brexit would be a disaster for Germany, we should do everything we can to keep the British inside the EU!"
Related articles German finance minister ADMITS budget pressures - recession fears grow EU CRACKS as top German minister 'we are NOT prepared' for hard Brexit
He added that the economic power of the UK is the same as that of the 19 smallest EU countries, so Brexit is the equivalent of 19 countries leaving at the same time.
He said that especially for Germany, Brexit would be devastating.
The economist was speaking at the ‘Forum Automotive Logistics’ in Munich, organised by the German Association of the Automotive Industry and the German Logistics Association.
The German car industry is extremely worried about Brexit - in 2017, the country exported 769,000 cars to the UK making it the single largest export market.
Hans-werner Sinn
Brexit could see extra tariffs slapped on German cars, threatening to stifle the booming industry.
Dr Sinn criticised German chancellor Angela Merkel for working with the UK towards a deal.
He said: “I think we should be flexible. But not in the sense of what Mrs Merkel says by offering the British an offer to be able to leave easier and sign this stupid agreement.
“On the contrary, by keeping them in.”
The economist threw his support behind a second referendum, which many hope will reverse Brexit.
Related articles Angela Merkel news: How German Chancellor was 'MOCKED as a MILKMAID' EU FURY: How Berlusconi sparked OUTRAGE with 'shock Schulz Nazi jibe'
Hans-Werner Sinn
He said: “I hope that reason will prevail and that there wil be a way to the second referendum in the end.
“This way the deadline would also be postponed.
“Now, I do not want to confuse hope with a prognosis, it is easy to do, you have to be careful.
“There might still be a Brexit. For Germany, that would be a disaster.
“We should do everything we can to keep the the British in the EU, out of our own interests, to keep the EU cosmopolitan and to protect our export industries.”
Additional reporting by Monika Pallenberg
