 The eurozone economy has been hit by a catalogue of supposed "one-offs" that have shaken its member economies and upset markets. First it was low water levels on the Rhine, the river that acts as an artery for the transport of goods into Germany. This was bad news for the chemicals sector in particular. Then it was a body blow to the auto industry from the "dieselgate" emissions scandal, pushing car sales off a cliff and heralding new regulation. Next came a standoff between Rome and Brussels over spending plans. Hot on the heels of this was the disruption caused by French populist protesters, the "gilets jaunes".
These events have dominated headlines, yet none of these individual factors can account for the prolonged slowdown under way in the bloc. Rather, the real trigger for eurozone growth coming off the boil, and to a lesser extent the UK, is the Chinese slowdown, according to Mark Carney, the Bank of England Governor. "Direct exposure to China for the UK is relatively modest. Indirect exposure via Europe is more material," he said.
For Carney, one of the most important questions facing the outlook for the UK is the extent to which it is "idiosyncratic factors" behind the eurozone's troubles, or instead, the Chinese economic slowdown that has been exacerbated by trade tensions with the US. The Bank's quarterly inflation report, released last week, was clear: there will be no snap back to growth for the currency bloc, it will "remain sluggish in the near term".
What divides economists, however, is whether or not "sluggish" goes quite far enough. With Threadneedle Street separately warning in last year's financial stability report that the UK's banks would feel the fallout of Italian financial trauma, thanks to indirect links via France among others, the costs of a eurozone meltdown for the UK could be considerable.
If the doom loop - the toxic link between Italian banks with large holdings of sovereign debt that means political drama can spiral into ever weakening banks' balance sheets - is triggered, UK firms could feel its effects via higher borrowing costs.
In its dire health check on the Italian economy released last week, the International Monetary Fund reiterated this warning. "Spillovers from heightened stress in Italy would be global and significant", the IMF said. French, Spanish, Portuguese and Belgian banks have "sizeable" exposure in the country, it said.
This time, China's regime, which pumped vast stimulus into the economy during previous downturns, will not ride to the rescue in the same way. According to calculations from Capital Economics, the stimulus in the financial crisis was equivalent to a staggering 1.5pc of global GDP. In 2015 it was 0.6pc. In 2019, they predict a boost of just 0.3pc.
The impact of the stimulus package is by no means as large as what we have seen before," said Robert McAdie, chief crossasset strategist at BNP Paribas. And, idiosyncratic cracks aside, there are some longer-term problems facing Europe's economy and markets. If equities look cheap, they are cheap for a reason, City analysts say. "There are headwinds. There is a shortage of skilled labour and that's pushing up labour costs. That means margins are compressed and you're going to see further pressure on equities. That's a negative for growth," said McAdie.
European banks are seeing their stocks trail at lows not seen since 2008. Investors are worried. One reason why is that populist unrest may be here to stay. Political risk may have lessened in France following president Macron's costly giveaways and a temporary deal with Brussels on Italian spending plans. Yet "populism is still one of the key risks facing Europe. As we're going into the EU elections that can still have an impact in terms of sentiment," McAdie said.
Other economists have different deadlines in mind when trying to work out how serious political turmoil in the block could become. For Marchel Alexandrovich, of Jefferies, the true "crunch moment" for Italy and its future relationship with Brussels will come in September, when it has to write its next budget. "The big question for people looking at Italy is around next year's budget in September. The politicians will have to choose between upping taxes or cutting spending. Then the coalition gets potentially splintered. Crunch time for Italian politics might not come until six months from now," Alexandrovich said.
Importantly, if credit ratings agencies start to lose faith that a political accord can be struck in September, a sovereign downgrade could come much sooner for the eurozone's third largest economy. This, the IMF warned, could thrust markets into "unchartered territory".
There are two sources of potential optimism. Alexandrovich thinks survey data from the bloc, which has been extremely poor, may be over exaggerating the eurozone's woes. This would include the purchasing managers' index from IHS Markit, which suggested that growth in the bloc had hit its slowest rate for five and a half years in January. Another potential touch of silver on an otherwise increasingly dark cloud could be a rise in domestic demand, Alexandrovich argued. "Markets are really focused on the weakness we've had, rather than looking at positive developments for wages and the labour market," he said. Even if there is a pick up in domestic demand, it is unlikely to make up for a decline in exports to Asia. This will place the cracks in eurozone economies under pressure in coming months.
Italy entered technical recession in the second half of last year and growth across the bloc is at its slowest since the 2013 debt crisis. The European Commission has cut its growth forecast for this year to 1.3pc, in a move that pushed German 10-year bond yields to their lowest level in more than two years.
There are also "several downside risks" to forecasts, the Commission warned, including US-China trade tensions and Brexit uncertainty. Gone is the narrative of "one-offs". Instead they are "interconnected", which could "magnify their impact on the economy" if they materialise. That will determine whether a slowdown spirals into disaster.
