 Trade wars and housing slumps are potential threats to progress, writes Anna Patty.
Australia's economy has been improving slowly, but new research has found many workers feel gloomy and lack confidence about the job market.
University of Melbourne economist Jeff Borland said Australia's labour market had been stronger over the past two years than it had been for 10 years. But growth has been slow, and wage increases remained below longer-term averages.
While the past couple of years
of economic growth had been positive, they were "positive against a background of weaker performance", he said.
Overall, "the last 10 years has been a decade of slower growth
in the labour market and improvement in conditions for workers than the decade before."
And any further disruption to the economy could throw things out of kilter, Professor Borland warned. "Trade wars and housing slumps could easily derail what appears to have been an improving situation in the last couple of years," he said.
Despite an improvement in the economic outlook, a new survey - the inaugural LinkedIn Opportunity Index - shows that employees in Australia are more pessimistic about their jobs future than their counterparts across the Asia-Pacific region.
Only Millennials seem to have a more robust outlook, the survey suggests.
The research found that workers in Indonesia and India were more confident in the growth prospects of their countries' economies.
Australia, Hong Kong and Japan trailed in the opportunity index, with workers there more cautious about job opportunities.
Developed countries pessimism
Overall, developing countries were far more optimistic about the future than developed economies. The research was based on 11,000 respondents aged 18 to 60 across the Asia-Pacific region.
"The LinkedIn Opportunity Index suggests that respondents living in developed economies like Japan, Hong Kong, Australia, and Singapore are relatively less confident compared to their counterparts in the developing countries of Indonesia, India, and the Philippines," the report says.
"Respondents living in developed economies may believe that their market has reached saturation point or has plateaued in terms of actual economic growth."
Matt Tindale, country manager for LinkedIn Australia and NZ, said he was surprised to see Australia's opportunity index and confidence in the economy was so low compared to other Asia-Pacific countries.
The report says the region accounts for more than 60 per cent of the world's growth and the International Monetary Fund projects it will grow by 5.4 per cent in 2019. According to the index, two in five Australians were expecting the economic situation to worsen over the next 12 months. About 29 per cent felt their greatest barrier to opportunity was their financial status, followed by a difficult jobs market (25 per cent) and a lack of confidence (24 per cent).
The research also found that Millennials like Nick Papadoniou, 23, are feeling "extremely" confident about their employment future.
More than three-quarters of Australian Millennials were confident that their job opportunities would improve over the next 12 months, compared to 51 per cent of Baby Boomers and 61 per cent of Gen-Xers.
Bullish Millennials
Working for himself as a buyer's agent in real estate, Mr Papadoniou feels optimistic about the future of his property investment business in what is turning into a buyer's market.
"With the resources that we have at the moment, I am finding it pretty hard to feel any other way other than optimistic about things," he said. "The ability to connect with employers at the moment is greater than it was 10 to 15 years ago."
PwC chief economist Jeremy Thorpe said despite falling house prices and declining retail sales, there was an underlying resilience in the Australian economy. There has been significant growth in full-time employment in the past year, but underemployment
has also increased over
recent years.
And people were feeling apprehensive about change, he noted.
"I think people see change is coming ... automation is a bigger thing and that creates a degree of concern or uncertainty. But as long as people have jobs and we see jobs growth, that concern is in the background," he said.
Digital
disruption
PwC national skills lead, Sara Caplan, said most CEOs were expecting artificial intelligence (AI) will have a bigger impact on the labour force than the introduction of the internet. But less than a third had plans to introduce AI in the next three years.
She believes new jobs will replace those lost through digital disruption, but it will depend on employers planning for the future.
"In Australia in particular, companies are talking about digital disruption and the effects technology is going to have on the business, but they are not yet acting on it," she said.
"The level of uncertainty and pessimism is driven partly by a lack of knowledge and ... employers play a role in that.
"If people knew more about what the implications are of the future and how things might change, then I think that helps overcome that."
