 The Federal Reserve Bank of New York recently announced the promotion of 22 assistant vice presidents to vice president and seven vice presidents to senior vice president.
The following people have been promoted to senior vice president:
Dona Wong has been promoted to senior vice president in the digital strategy function of the Communications and Outreach Group.
Ms. Wong joined the Bank in 2011 in the digital strategy function, where she leads a team of content strategists, designers, and technologists to develop digital products and platforms for the Bank's strategic communications.
Prior to joining the Bank, Ms. Wong was the graphics director at The Wall Street Journal, where she set standards for all feature and breaking news graphics. Previously, Ms. Wong served as a business graphics editor at The New York Times, where she managed and developed graphics for the daily and weekly business sections. In addition, she has advised Fortune 500 companies and major government agencies on strategic communications.
Ms. Wong holds an MFA in information design from Yale University. She is also the author of The Wall Street Journal Guide to Information Graphics.
Michael East has been promoted to senior vice president in the Corporate Group, where he is the chief operating officer and head of the strategy and support function.
Mr. East joined the Bank in March 2016 as the Corporate Group's COO, responsible for driving operational performance, promoting strong risk management, and ensuring strategic alignment and service integration across the Group's businesses.
Michael holds a BS in electrical engineering from the United States Military Academy at West Point and an MBA from the Harvard Business School.
Sandra Lee has been promoted to senior vice president in the Policy Planning Office of the Executive Office.
Ms. Lee joined the Bank in March 2008 as a senior attorney in the bank supervision and markets function in the Legal Group. In July 2009, she was appointed an officer of the Bank with the title of counsel. From 2010 to 2012, Ms. Lee worked at the U.S. Treasury Department as a senior policy advisor on the Financial Stability Oversight Council staff and also served as a senior advisor to the Under Secretary of Domestic Finance. In 2013, she returned to the Bank and joined the Executive Office as deputy director of the Office of Financial Stability and Regulatory Policy. She was promoted to assistant vice president that year and to vice president in January 2016. She was named director of the Policy Planning Office in the Executive Office in 2015.
Prior to joining the Bank, Ms. Lee was in private practice at the law firms of Simpson Thacher & Bartlett and Patterson Belknap Webb & Tyler. She was a law clerk to the Honorable Michael Chertoff of the U.S. Court of Appeals, Third Circuit.
Ms. Lee holds a BA from Yale University and a JD from New York University School of Law.
Ivan Hurwitz has been promoted to senior vice president in the bank applications function of the Legal Group.
Mr. Hurwitz joined the Bank in 1993 as a law clerk in the legal function. In 1998 he was appointed an officer of the Bank with the title of counsel, and in 2001 he was promoted to assistant vice president. In 2007, he was promoted to vice president and head of the bank applications function, where he has led the department in the review and analysis of regulatory applications by supervised financial institutions.
Mr. Hurwitz holds a BS in economics, with concentrations in finance and public policy, from the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. He holds a JD from the Boston University School of Law.
Shawn Phillips has been promoted to senior vice president in the Legal Group.
Ms. Phillips is the corporate secretary of the New York Fed, a role she has held since October 2016. She acts as secretary for the Bank's Board of Directors and Management Committee, and is responsible for the administration of the Bank's Freedom of Information Policy.
Ms. Phillips joined the Bank in February 2007 as an attorney in the Legal Group assigned to corporate affairs, and in January 2009 was appointed an officer of the Bank with the title of counsel within the same function. Prior to joining the Bank, she worked as an agency attorney for the New York City Fire Department and as an associate at two New York City law firms.
Ms. Phillips holds a BA in history and a JD, both from the University of Michigan.
Valerie Wilde has been promoted to senior vice president in the Legal Group.
Ms. Wilde is an associate general counsel and head of the corporate affairs unit, a small, specialized team of employment lawyers within the Legal Group's enforcement, litigation, police, investigations and corporate affairs division.
Ms. Wilde joined the Legal Group in 2004. Her day-to-day advisory practice involves counseling management and Human Resources in all areas related to employment law, and her complementary practice focuses on matters related to audit and ethics. Along with her counterpart at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Ms. Wilde established and acts as co-chair of the Employment Counsel Law Group, which includes employment lawyers from each of the 12 banks in the Federal Reserve System.
Ms. Wilde began her career as an associate at the employment litigation firm of Jackson Lewis in New York, where she worked for five years. She subsequently spent two years at Kasowitz, Benson, Torres & Friedman, where she worked in the employment practices and litigation group before joining the New York Fed. She holds a bachelor's degree from the University of Michigan and a JD from George Washington University.
Stein Berre has been promoted to senior vice president in the large institution supervision coordinating committee (LISCC) function of the Supervision Group.
Mr. Berre has worked at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York since 2009 and has had leadership roles in areas of risk, policy and on dedicated supervisory teams. He currently heads the supervisory team for a domestic LISCC firm.
Previous roles at the Fed include project management on the first supervisory stress test (SCAP), leading the New York Fed's efforts on recovery and resolution planning, and leadership of dedicated supervisory teams. Mr. Berre is also involved in a number of initiatives on resource use and planning.
Before joining the Fed, he led the global corporate risk consulting practice at Oliver Wyman, where he worked from 1992 to 2009, with a focus in the areas of banking and insurance strategy, risk assessment, risk model development, management reporting and governance. He has degrees in public policy and history from Princeton University and Harvard University.
The following people have been promoted to vice president:
Padma Kumar has been promoted to vice president in the Audit Group.
Mr. Kumar joined the Bank in March 2009 as an IT audit manager with responsibilities for assessing controls over the Bank's information systems through audits of the technology infrastructure, integrated audits of business processes, and monitoring new business initiatives and software development projects. He was promoted to officer in December 2012 and to assistant vice president in December 2015.
Prior to joining the Bank, he was an IT audit manager at Fannie Mae in Washington D.C., where he directed the development and execution of audit plans for the technology audit group, covering infrastructure platforms, business applications, application development projects, and integrated audits of business processes.
Mr. Kumar has a bachelor's degree in chemical engineering from the University of Kerala, India, and an MBA with concentrations in information systems and internal audit from Louisiana State University. He also has the Certified Information Systems Auditor (CISA), Certified Internal Auditor (CIA) and Certified in Risk and Information Systems Control (CRISC) certifications.
Mark Slagus has been promoted to vice president in the real estate function of the Corporate Group.
Mr. Slagus joined the Bank in February 1998 as a senior designer in the building services function. In 2011, he was appointed an officer of the Bank and led the real estate strategy team for the real estate and general services function. He was promoted to assistant vice president in December 2014.
Mr. Slagus holds a bachelor of architecture from the New Jersey Institute of Technology School of Architecture.
Brian Watson has been promoted to vice president in the strategic planning office of the Executive Office.
Mr. Watson joined the Bank in 2012 as a senior associate in the Corporate Group, where he was appointed an officer of the Bank in 2014. In 2015 he joined the strategic planning office, where he leads an in-house consulting and program management practice focused on cross-Bank initiatives and business transformation. He is also the secretary of the Bank's operational services subcommittee. He was promoted to assistant vice president in 2016.
Prior to joining the Bank, Mr. Watson held various roles in the financial industry and was a management consult with an emphasis on process re-engineering, risk management, product design, and change management.
Mr. Watson holds a bachelor's degree with honors and high distinction in chemistry from the Pennsylvania State University and a PhD in chemical engineering from the University of Delaware.
Lisa Pacheco has been promoted to vice president in the Financial Services Group.
Ms. Pacheco joined the Bank in July 1990 and held various administrative roles in the Statistics and Supervision Groups. In 1993, she joined the Legal Group as a paralegal in the litigation and enforcement unit, where she supported administrative and civil actions.
Ms. Pacheco joined the wholesale product office in 1997, where she held a variety of analyst positions. In 2013, she was promoted to program management officer, where she led efforts to complete a multiyear program to modernize the Fedwire Services applications and infrastructure. She transitioned to oversight responsibilities for wholesale operations and was subsequently promoted to assistant vice president in 2016. Ms. Pacheco is also responsible for managing the provision of master accounts and Federal Reserve Financial Services for Second District customers.
Ms. Pacheco holds a bachelor's degree in operations management from Baruch College.
Wendy Wong has been promoted to vice president in the Financial Services Group.
Ms. Wong joined the Bank in 1998 and worked in a variety of analytical and operational roles in the Markets Group. In 2008, she joined the Special Investments Management Group to manage reporting and administration for the Maiden Lane LLCs. She was appointed an officer of the Bank in 2012. In 2013, Ms. Wong was selected as a member of a five-person team to lead the multiyear strategic planning initiative and served as a program manager for six cross-functional teams that were formed as part of the initiative. In March 2015, Ms. Wong joined the wholesale product office as the head of the risk management function. She was promoted to assistant vice president in 2015.
Ms. Wong holds a BA in economics from Wellesley College and an MBA in finance from New York University.
Karen Lynch has been promoted to vice president in the Human Resources Group, where she is a director in the human resources business partner function.
Ms. Lynch joined the Bank in February 2010 as an officer in the human resources business partner function, establishing a human resources business partner model at the Bank. She was promoted to assistant vice president in January 2011. She leads a team of experienced human resources business partners and provides strategic human resources-related advice and consultation to a diverse group of businesses at the Bank in support of their mission and objectives.
Prior to joining the Bank, Ms. Lynch worked for Goldman Sachs as a vice president and KPMG LLP as a director.
Ms. Lynch holds a bachelor's degree in business administration from Ramapo College of New Jersey.
Jennifer Roth has been promoted to vice president in the Human Resources Group, where she is a director in the human resources business partner function.
Ms. Roth joined the Bank in April 2010 as an officer in the human resources business partner function, establishing a human resources business partner model at the Bank. She was promoted to assistant vice president in January 2012. She leads a team of experienced human resources business partners and provides strategic human resources-related advice and consultation to a diverse group of businesses at the Bank in support of their mission and objectives.
Prior to joining the Bank, Ms. Roth was managing director, head of human resources for Ambac.
Ms. Roth holds a bachelor's degree in education from Bucknell University and a master of education from Pennsylvania State University. She has a certificate in career planning and development from New York University.
Erin Kelly has been promoted to senior counsel and vice president in the Legal Group.
Ms. Kelly joined the Bank as an attorney in October 2010. She was named an officer in July 2012 and an assistant vice president in January 2015. Prior to joining the Bank, Ms. Kelly was an associate at Shearman & Sterling LLP.
Ms. Kelly holds a BA in American Studies from Wesleyan University and a JD from Fordham University School of Law.
Meghan McCurdy has been promoted to vice president and senior counsel in the Legal Group.
Ms. McCurdy joined the Bank in October 2010 as a senior document librarian in the Special Investments Management Group and moved to the enforcement, litigation, and investigations division of the Legal Group as an attorney in June 2011.
She was appointed an officer of the Bank in January 2013 and promoted to assistant vice president in July 2014. Ms. McCurdy advises on a variety of litigation and regulatory oversight matters and provides guidance to bank supervisors on enforcement and other supervisory actions for financial institutions across supervisory portfolios.
Prior to joining the Bank, Ms. McCurdy was an associate at White & Case.
Ms. McCurdy holds a BA in government from Cornell University and a JD from American University.
Rosanne Notaro has been promoted to vice president in the Legal Group.
Ms. Notaro began her career in the Legal Group in 1990 and rejoined the Bank in 2012 as an assistant vice president in the bank supervision and markets division of the Legal Group. Her responsibilities include providing legal counsel on supervisory and regulatory matters relating to domestic and foreign supervised institutions, supporting outside advisory groups and interagency coordination efforts, and contributing to policy development.
Prior to rejoining the Bank, Ms. Notaro worked for the New York State Department of Banking (now the Department of Financial Services) from 1996 to 2012 in a variety of roles within the legal department, including serving as acting general counsel. She was an associate in the law firm of Rogers & Wells in New York City from 1994 to 1996.
Ms. Notaro holds a BA in economics and political science from the State University of New York at Buffalo and a JD from Georgetown University Law Center.
Edward Silva has been promoted to vice president in the compliance function of the Legal Group.
Mr. Silva is the head of the financial crimes unit. He is a founding member of the compliance function and is responsible for developing and implementing the Bank's anti-money laundering, U.S. economic sanctions, and anti-fraud compliance programs.
Mr. Silva began his career in 1998 as a bank examiner in the Supervision Group. He examined large complex banking institutions, regional banks, community banks, and branches and agencies of foreign banking institutions and progressed through positions of increasing responsibility.
Mr. Silva was appointed an officer of the Bank in January 2009. He was promoted to assistant vice president in January 2012.
Mr. Silva holds a BA in economics and government from Cornell University and an MBA from New York University's Stern School of Business. He is a Certified Anti-Money Laundering Specialist, a Certified Fraud Examiner, and a Certified Information Systems Auditor. Mr. Silva also completed the FINRA Institute at Wharton Program and is a Certified Regulatory and Compliance Professional.
Seetha Antoine has been promoted to vice president in the group shared services function of the Markets Group. She currently serves as head of the project management office (PMO), focusing on strategic portfolio planning and governance.
Ms. Antoine joined the Bank in 1995 as a data processing analyst in the Technology Group. After departing the Bank in 1997, she held various positions of increasing responsibility in the financial services industry. She served as a senior business analyst with Bank of America Merrill Lynch, and held various information technology, operations, and project management roles at the New York Stock Exchange, including serving as the managing director and head of the PMO.
Ms. Antoine returned to the Bank's Markets Group in 2015 as an assistant vice president.
Ms. Antoine holds a bachelor's degree in computer science from Pace University and a master's in technology management from Stevens Institute of Technology.
Patrick Dwyer has been promoted to vice president in the discount window and collateral valuation function of the Markets Group.
Mr. Dwyer joined the Bank in August 2000 as an analyst on the open market desk. He served in various roles conducting monetary policy operations and analyzing financial market conditions. In 2009 he moved to the discount window area, and is currently primarily responsible for the provision of intraday and overnight credit to institutions in the Federal Reserve's Second District.
Mr. Dwyer holds a BA in political science from the University of California, San Diego and a master's in international economics and finance from the Columbia University School of International and Public Affairs.
Max Hrabrov has been promoted to vice president in the business technology function of the Markets Group.
Mr. Hrabrov joined the Bank in 2009 as a solution architect in the business technology function. He served as the technical leader on a strategic data transformation program in Markets, and proceeded to take on an increasing degree of responsibility for the Markets technology strategy overall. He was appointed an officer of the Bank in 2012, and was promoted to assistant vice president in 2014. Markets architecture was established as a business technology directorate in 2014 in the Markets Group under Mr. Hrabrov's leadership.
Prior to joining the Bank, Mr. Hrabrov spent nearly 10 years at IBM Global Services in development, architecture, and data management.
Mr. Hrabrov holds a bachelor's degree in computer science from New York University.
Richard Crump has been promoted to vice president in the capital markets function of the Research and Statistics Group.
Mr. Crump joined the Bank in 2009 as an economist. He was appointed an officer of the Bank in 2014 and promoted to assistant vice president in 2015. He is currently the head of the capital markets function, and his fields of interest include financial economics and econometric theory. His recent work has focused on estimating risk premiums in real and nominal Treasury yields and equities and evaluating post-crisis regulatory reforms.
Mr. Crump holds a bachelor's degree from MIT, along with a master's degree in statistics and a PhD in economics from the University of California at Berkeley.
Maria Massei-Rosato has been promoted to vice president in the data capabilities office (DCO) in the Research & Statistics Group.
Ms. Massei-Rosato oversees a team focused on ensuring maximum data usability across the New York Fed, with the goal of making complex data easy to find, navigate, manipulate, and share. She has been with the DCO since it was founded in 2014.
Previously, Ms. Massei-Rosato managed the Bank's business continuity program, coordinated the Bank's investment review process, and held various positions in the Technology Group. In 2011, Ms. Massei-Rosato completed a secondment at the Board of Governors supporting efforts to manage the projects spawned from the passage of the Dodd-Frank Act.
Ms. Massei-Rosato holds a BS from New York University and a MFA from The New School. Maria is also an adjunct professor at the Parsons School of Design, where she has developed a graduate course on storytelling with data.
Andrea Tambalotti has been promoted to vice president in the macroeconomic and monetary studies function in the Research and Statistics Group.
Mr. Tambalotti joined the New York Fed as an economist in July 2003. He became an officer in July 2013 and was the function head of the macroeconomic and monetary studies function from 2014 to the end of 2018.
His research focuses on the use of general equilibrium models as tools for macroeconomic and monetary policy analysis, and it has been published in the Quarterly Journal of Economics, the Journal of Political Economy, and the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, among others. Recent work explores the causes and implications of low interest rates in the global economy, as well as the connection between consumer expectations and macroeconomic outcomes using data from the New York Fed's Survey of Consumer Expectations. He has also written on the role of mortgage debt in the Great Recession and the housing boom that preceded it, on the sources of business cycle fluctuations, and on the role of credibility in monetary policy.
He holds a PhD in economics from Princeton University and a BA and MA from Bocconi University in Milan.
Mary Craig has been promoted to vice president in the large institution supervision coordinating committee (LISCC) function of the Supervision Group.
Ms. Craig joined the Bank in July 2005 in the financial sector trends function of the Supervision Group. She was then seconded to the Basel Committee for Banking Supervision (BCBS) in Switzerland from 2007-2011. As the Secretariat member of the Working Group on Liquidity during the financial crisis, she worked with the BCBS members to develop the first internationally harmonized liquidity standards, including the liquidity coverage ratio. She was appointed officer in July 2011 upon her return, as she became a team leader for liquidity supervision. She became deputy lead in charge of the supervision of a LISCC firm in 2015 and the lead at the beginning of 2019.
Prior to joining the Bank, she worked with Financial Services Volunteer Corps, helping to develop financial sector infrastructure in the Balkans and the Middle East. She was also in the Peace Corps in Mongolia.
Ms. Craig holds a BA in international affairs from the University of Memphis and a master's degree from Columbia University's School of International and Public Affairs.
Ann Miner has been promoted to vice president in the dedicated supervisory team (DST) function of the Supervision Group.
She currently serves as deputy DST lead, supervising a domestic firm in the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee portfolio. Most recently she was deputy DST lead of a foreign firm in the same portfolio.
Ms. Miner joined the Bank in 1999, and her career has included roles in the Automation, Corporate, and Supervision Groups. Her work in Supervision since 2004 has entailed increasingly responsible roles, and she was promoted to officer in 2008 and to assistant vice president in 2010.
Ms. Miner served as the first president of the Women's Mentoring and Empowerment Network at the Bank and has represented the New York Fed on the Basel Operational Risk Committee.
Prior to joining the Bank, Ms. Miner handled project coordination, proposal, and information security efforts at a national laboratory and defense contracting firms.
She holds a BA in Economics from Mount Holyoke College and a master's in management from Stevens Institute of Technology.
John O'Sullivan has been promoted to vice president in the large institution supervision coordinating committee (LISCC) function of the Supervision Group.
Mr. O'Sullivan joined the bank in 2009 and has held various positions within the Supervision Group. In July 2013 he was appointed officer with responsibilities as the national coordinator of the Shared National Credit Program. In 2015 he was promoted to assistant vice present, as manager of the interest rate risk team in the liquidity department. He is a member of the LISCC Capital Program leadership group and leads a national team responsible for supervising retail and wholesale credit risk.
Prior to joining the Bank in 2009, John held positions across a variety of financial institutions, including Paloma Partners Management Co., Plexus Partners, and the Chase Manhattan Bank. John holds a MA in economics from NYU, a BA in economics from Fordham University, and is a CFA charterholder.
Sean Sullivan has been promoted to vice president in the large institution supervision coordinating committee (LISCC) function in the Supervision Group.
Mr. Sullivan joined the Bank in 2006 and worked on supervisory assignments across portfolios in Supervision. He then joined the market and liquidity risk function, with a focus on payment systems, and then on a financial market infrastructure supervisory team. In 2011, he joined the financial market infrastructure function, where he was the team leader for two systemically important financial market infrastructures and played a role in developing a new ratings system. He was promoted to officer in 2013 and assistant vice president in 2015.
Prior to joining the Bank, Mr. Sullivan spent a number of years in the financial industry in asset management. He holds a bachelor's degree in finance from Fordham University and an MBA in finance from New York University's Stern School of Business.
Jia Ye has been promoted to vice president in the information security function of the Technology Group.
Mr. Ye joined the Bank in early 2005 and currently heads the Bank's cyber security risk assessment and management team. He previously had various responsibilities, including cyber intrusion detection and prevention, security data correlation service, and security monitoring for the Federal Reserve System with the National Incident Response Team (NIRT).
Prior to joining the Bank, Mr. Ye spent eight years as application developer in various areas, including education, healthcare, and media. He holds a BS in computer information science from CUNY Brooklyn College.
(Federal Reserve Bank of New York)
