 since the end of 2017 British households have been getting less happy. This may not seem like an economics issue, but it is. Economists are well aware that rising GDP doesn't necessarily lead to greater happiness and there's a good case for aiming to improve average happiness as well as boosting real incomes. New data shows a contrast between direct measures of living standards and these more subjective assessments of wellbeing. In the third quarter of last year, real household disposable income per head rose by 0.7 per cent on the level of a year earlier. There were comparable gains in earnings and employment levels. Yet levels of life satisfaction are unchanged on the year. Happiness is declining. Economists know the limits of GDP and consumption as measures of welfare. GDP is defective even as a narrow measure of market values because it doesn't include depreciation. More widely, nonmonetisable measures, such as air pollution or the quality of work, can have a big impact on welfare. The benefits of standard economic measures are not that they capture everything but that we can agree on what they mean. Measures of happiness are more subjective, relying on surveys. Moreover, it's intuitively sensible that there should be a correlation between rising incomes and happiness. So why are people becoming less happy in Britain, and what should policymakers do about it? Part of the reason is probably financial. Household debt per head has been rising since 2013 and amounts to 133 per cent of disposable income. Since the second quarter of 2016, spending per person has outpaced disposable income by £119. If households are living beyond their means, this will have an effect on their happiness. There's also evidence that people's expectations of their financial position and the health of the overall economy are declining. It's a reasonable guess that households are wary in the same way as businesses of the uncertainties surrounding Brexit. Even beyond these more obviously "economic" concerns there's a question of what policymakers should do. An influential critique known as the Easterlin paradox (after the American economist Richard Easterlin) holds that once a developed country reaches a certain level of wealth, increments in growth don't translate into an increase in happiness. There's no consensus on the remedies, or even whether governments should be concerned about their citizens' psychological states. Mine is just a personal preference that I suspect would result in an increase in average happiness. First, higher consumption can damage the environment and raise traffic congestion, making people unhappy. Governments should use the tax system, regulation and congestion charging to ensure that polluters pay and traffic is eased. Second, an affluent society produces problems of obesity, stress and unhealthy consumption. Again, the tax system and regulation can help. A tax on sugary drinks, as well as punitive levies on tobacco and bans on smoking, can increase people's health and wellbeing. And stress can translate into clinical conditions such as depression. There's a big economic cost to mental illness in the workplace. The need for a shift in health priorities to address mental illness is increasingly recognised across the political spectrum. Third, there is some evidence that more equal societies, such as the Scandinavian countries, have higher levels of happiness. Making post-tax incomes more equal, without enforcing equality of outcome, is a goal I'd favour even at the cost of a lower level of GDP than might otherwise be attainable. None of these policy aims is beyond argument. But the aim of greater happiness is a real economic goal. Oliver Kamm is a Times leader writer and columnist. Twitter: @OliverKamm CREDIT: OliverKamm
