 RIGA, Feb 11, BNS - Moderate inflation will continue in Latvia this year, banking analysts told BNS, commenting on information about consumer price changes in January.
Luminor economist Peteris Strautins told BNS that the price growth recorded in January is included in Luminor base scenario, according to which consumer prices in 2019 are expected to grow by 2.5 percent on average.
He said that despite the European Central Bank's (ECB) wishes and forecasts, inflation in the euro area is around 1 percent. Low inflation sounds good and pleasant for consumers, but there are also risks because without a higher inflation in the core of the euro area, it will be hard for Italy's economy to get out of stagnation. Inflation in the euro area also affects inflation in Latvia.
SEB banka macroeconomic expers Dainis Gaspuitis said that despite the favorable processes in the economy, the 2018 was passed with a low inflation. Looking at this year, except for some fast growing economies, the global inflation still remains low, which means that external factors will not affect Latvia's inflation.
"Following the pressure on wages and the situation in the labor market, services will become more expensive. This year households will also see a rise in excise tax, electricity and heating energy prices. Business representatives have to be careful about potential price growth because consumers remain critical about prices. Even though the average wage keeps growing, purchasing power of a number of social groups is not improving as fast. This year inflation will continue to rise at 2.9 percent," said Gaspuitis.
Citadele economist Martins Abolins told BNS that the inflation level in Latvia has slightly climbed compared to December, even though the trends are the opposite in Lithuania and Estonia as well as the euro area. Inflation in Latvia might remain close to 3 percent until the middle of the year, he said.
Swedbank economist Linda Vildava said that the monthly inflation in January is unusually steep for the past years - 0.5 percent. In the coming months the annual inflation might be below 3 percent while in a year it could be similar as last year - around 2.5 percent.
As reported, in January 2018, Latvian consumer prices moved up 0.5 percent from December, while the annual inflation rate (January 2019 against January 2018) stood at 3 percent, the Central Statistical Bureau (CSB) said. During the last 12 months, consumer prices rose 2.6 percent against the previous 12-month period.
BNS, +371 67088611, zinas@bns.lv
