 WHETHER it's because the wives of City's bankers don't like the food in Frankfurt or find the riots in Paris a little too hot, the great Brexit exodus to the Continent is not happening, for now at least. Yet another survey has shown that the fears of UK-based overseas firms relocating across the Channel have been well and truly exaggerated. So far, the number of bankers and other finance experts who have been transferred to other European capitals is tiny: 0.5% of the 400,000 people who work in the financial services sector. The latest Reuters survey is fact-based rather than a forecast: it asked 132 of the biggest and most internationally focused UK-based banks, insurers, asset managers and private equity firms what their plans were at the end of January, just as the risks of a no-deal Brexit started to heat up. The results showed that firms said about 2000 jobs are likely to have moved, or have been created in EU countries. That's a fifth of the 10,000 jobs that were feared would be lost when its first survey was released more than a year ago. Interestingly, HSBC, which made such a public warning a while back that a 1000 jobs would be moved to Paris, has not moved any yet. In total, the bigger investment banks are thought to have moved about 890 jobs collectively, mainly to set up "brass-plate" offices in case of no deal and no immediate future agreement on services. It didn't get as many headlines but there was another separate Reuters survey which reported that most of the London-based top investment banks which were asked about their future plans indicated that they are looking to hire a greater number of people in London than any other EU capital. This is great news, and those of us who said the forecasts were grossly overdone would not dream of indulging in any schadenfreude. Well, maybe a little: who remembers now those dire numbers from consultants, Oliver Wyman, saying that 75,000 jobs could go, or the warning from the London Stock Exchange two years ago that job losses would be as high as 232,000? Enough said. As Nassim Taleb, former options trader and author of the brilliant The Black Swan, likes to say, forecasting is a mug's game played by economists who are "looking for snowflakes and who ignore the avalanche". And that avalanche is not likely to be Brexit. Certainly not if you talk to the owners of the UK's homegrown financial businesses which make up the City's underbelly and its capital markets. There are no Reuters surveys to go by so I have taken my own rough snapshot of that underbelly: it's getting plumper. Indeed, Simon Rogerson, co-founder and chief executive of the Octopus Group, one of the City's fastest-growing firms with £8.5 billion under management, says there has never been a better time in the UK to be an entrepreneur or investor. Started 19 years ago, Octopus turns over £500 million a year, employs 1000 staff, will hire another 200 this year and at least that many the year after. Its tentacles spread from GP surgeries to property but it has focused on two industries which Rogerson sees as ripe for disruption: financial services and energy — Octopus Business Energy now owns renewable solar and wind assets valued at more than £2 billion, and supplies more than 600,000 customers with renewable energy. Anthony Dalwood, boss of Gresham House, the specialist alternative asset manager with investments in timber, renewable energy and housing, is equally bullish that Brexit will not be a long-term disaster and the City will not only survive but thrive. In fact, Dalwood sees big opportunities from any dislocation in the capital markets, and is on the prowl for more acquisitions. Sam Smith, finnCap's chief executive, who recently listed her business on AIM after buying Cavendish Corporate Finance, is also more optimistic about the UK's outlook. After a few tough months, Smith says the mood among investors is much healthier. Of more interest is that finnCap itself has plans to expand into the UK's regions where many start-ups are blossoming. Of course there should be no room for complacency: the latest figures for investment in seed-capital are lower and the amount of equity finance raised is down on 2017's high — as is bank lending to SMEs. But these are homegrown problems rather than Brexit related and can be fixed. Forecasting is a mug's game played by economists who look for snowflakes and ignore the avalanche CREDIT: Margareta Pagano
