 Economic growth tumbled to its joint-weakest in nine years at the end of 2018 as the UK joined the slump that has spread across much of the eurozone.
GDP rose by 0.2pc in the three months to December, slowing from 0.6pc in the previous quarter. It takes growth for last year to 1.4pc, the same level as 2012 and the joint-worst performance since the recession of 2009.
The picture is not expected to improve into 2019. In December alone GDP fell by 0.4pc, indicating worsening momentum by the very end of 2018.
The Bank of England predicts growth will slow to 1.2pc for 2019 as a whole, although a speedy resolution of the political uncertainty hanging over parts of the economy could boost that figure.
The construction industry shrank for the first time since the deep freeze of the Beast from the East struck last spring. Every one of the UK’s production industries, from manufacturing to mining, also contracted in the final three months of the year.
Even the dominant services sector struggled as sagging retail sales pulled output down in December, although it did record some growth over the quarter as a whole.
Slumping demand for diesel cars dragged down goods exports, which also suffered as the prior competitive boost from the weaker pound faded.
“The first half of 2019 will bring further challenges for the UK economy. China’s slowdown and weak growth in Europe are likely to bite at British exporters," said economist Tej Parikh at the Institute of Directors.
"At the same time, while consumers have shown resilience so far, many are becoming increasingly cautious with their wallets."
Rob Kent-Smith, of the Office for National Statistics, said: “GDP slowed in the last three months of the year with the manufacturing of cars and steel products seeing steep falls and construction also declining. However, services continued to grow with the health sector, management consultants and IT all doing well.
“Declines were seen across the economy in December, but single month data can be volatile meaning quarterly figures often give a better indication of the health of the economy."
Business investment tumbled by 1.4pc, its fourth consecutive quarterly decline. Economists blame political turmoil as a key factor pushing companies to hold off committing to any major financial decisions.
Suren Thiru, head of economics at the British Chambers of Commerce, said: “It’s vital that government avoids a messy and disorderly Brexit on 29th March as it would be a significant negative shock to the UK economy, damaging communities across the country.
“These figures underline the importance of ministers standing ready to lift confidence and boost investment intentions.”
The amount of economic output generated by the dominant services sector, which accounts for nearly 80pc of GDP, fell by 0.2pc between November and December last year. This drove the quarterly growth to 0.4pc at the end of 2018, down from 0.5pc from the previous two quarters.
Household consumption grew by 0.4pc, maintaining the steady pace of recent years to keep the economy expanding.
Government spending also provided a boost with consumption rising 1.4pc in the quarter.
This indicates there has been little rebalancing away from consumption and towards the investment and exports which is considered politically desirable.
Even household spending could be under threat in the near future, however.
“The housing market has also softened and there are signs that consumer spending has lost some momentum, despite the boost from higher real earnings growth and continued low unemployment rates,” said John Hawksworth, chief economist at PwC.
Here is my response to today’s #GDP figures. pic.twitter.com/AdGyXFvakl
- Philip Hammond (@PhilipHammondUK) 11 February 2019
Poor performance from retailers acted as a drag on GDP, with declines for all parts of the industry except food shops and sales of fuel.
Other areas that suffered notable declines were engineering and architectural businesses and scientific research and equipment.
The fall in building-related services tallies with the sharp decline in construction activity, which sank 2.8pc in December - the biggest month-on-month fall for five and a half years. For the three months to December all activities in the sector fell by 0.3pc.
Larger companies preparing for a range of Brexit eventualities may have been behind the rise in legal services, which bucked the overall trend. It grew by 4.5pc in December, contributing 0.08pc growth to the services sector overall.
Such growth as there was came from consumer spending and Government activity.
