 Two years ago British businesses were in a “sweet spot”.
Brexit had wrought no changes on the economy. The article 50 deadline was far away on the horizon.
Global demand was picking up sharply. The long recovery from the financial crisis at last gathered steam.
The weaker pound was a boost to exports, a competitive boost the companies with no concerns about their EU trade.
“The result - higher prices and profits but unchanged rules and costs - represents something of a sweet spot for exporters and businesses that compete with imports,” said Ben Broadbent, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, speaking back in March 2017.
It feels like a very distant memory.
Goods exports fell in the final three months of 2018, slumping overseas demand showing that a willingness to make a purchase is every bit as important to potential buyers as the discount on offer from the weak pound.
Business investment dropped too, marking the fourth consecutive quarter of decline.
Compared with the final quarter of 2017 business investment is down 3.7pc.
This is an important problem for the economy.
Investment fuels future growth, giving workers more tools and increasingly their productivity. It makes them more efficient and productive, boosting growth and increasing living standards through lower prices and higher wages.
Without investment, growth is limited. The economy risks bumping up against what the Bank of England calls its ‘speed limit’, the amount by which the economy can grow without generating excessive inflation.
Why is investment so weak?
Political uncertainty is the obvious contender. Britain is due to leave the EU on 29 March but has yet to strike a deal agreeing the terms of that exit.
Under the Prime Minister’s deal a ‘transition’ begins, another two years in which the rules of trade with the EU do not change and in which a trade deal may be hammered out to cover the UK’s future outside the club. Without any agreement, a ‘no deal’ scenario, the UK leaves without this transition.
As a result businesses are holding back.
“It’s entirely logical, it’s rational and totally understandable, we totally understand why business is doing this, because if they think they’re going to have greater clarity in the course of a few weeks, or even a few months, that would be material to an investment decision, it makes sense to wait for that information,” said Mark Carney, the Bank of England’s Governor, last week.
A comparison with other leading economies suggests Brexit is the main factor.
Before the latest data the official numbers showed UK business investment fell by 1.8pc in the third quarter of 2018.
The next weakest G7 nation’s rate was growth of 1.5pc. The strongest grew by 6.8pc.
From 2012 to 2015 the UK was regularly the top performer in the pack. Since late 2017 it has consistently been the worst performer.
Will it bounce back?
If a Brexit deal could clear this political fog from the air, business investment might recover.
The moment of peak uncertainty would be averted, giving businesses more confidence in the situation.
Philip Hammond referred to this as part of a “deal dividend”, giving the economy “A boost from the end of uncertainty”.
Yet it would not make the entire future clear.
“We do expect investment to pick up once we know what is going on - the latest surveys say 50pc of businesses have not prepared yet for Brexit, so we do expect preparation which will involve investment,” says Yael Selfin, chief economist at KPMG UK.
However this investment may not boost future growth so much as shore up companies’ operations in the face of changing rules and regulations.
“The real key is whether there is investment in new capacity, or if it is just to replace obsolete capacity,” says Selfin.
Brexit | The best commentary
If businesses must spend to reorganise their supply chains or buy systems to handle customs checks, that is investment to handle current business volumes, not increase production
“It will show in the investment figures, but it will not necessarily make [capacity] larger,” she says.
Only investment in new capacity drives the economy forwards, and she fears that will only come in real volume when certainty on the final trade deal with the EU is arranged.
Aside from Brexit businesses have other worries. As the weak export figures show, global demand is weakening.
Italy is in recession, Germany and France are at risk of stagnation. China’s economy is slowing and the US’s boom is past its peak.
Britain’s investment levels may look weak compared with other major economies, but that goes not mean those peers are doing particularly well.
“In contrast to the global consumer, growth in business equipment investment tumbled at the start of 2018 and never recovered,” says Bruce Kasman at JP Morgan.
This suggests the UK is not alone in experiencing a slowdown - it is simply one of the worst of a bad bunch.
“Assuming, as is likely, that a negotiated deal with the EU is agreed and the UK enters the status quo transition period, UK economic activity may pick-up slightly as uncertainty lifts,” says Daniel Vernazza, chief UK economist at UniCredit.
“But any boost is likely to be small because the global economy will probably continue to slow.”
What does it mean for the economy?
Investment is crucial for growth, so this gloomy outlook risks harming GDP for years to come as investments are not made and productivity does not improve.
Politics and global growth are not the only factors involved - Howard Archer at the EY Item Club sees other reasons for firms to invest, noting there are “firms looking to increasingly invest in automation to make up for labour shortages and to try to boost productivity”.
This points to a significant silver lining for workers.
When companies are cautious on investment but still need to operate they can grow by hiring more staff.
This is thought to be one key factor behind Britain’s record employment rate and ultra-low unemployment.
With weak investment for the foreseeable future, this pattern of strong hiring could well continue.
As silver linings go, extra employment is quite a good one.
