 THE global economy is heading for a recession late this year or next, a Nobel Prize-winning economist has warned.
Nobel Prize-winning economist Paul Krugman has said the world is heading for a recession this year
Professor Paul Krugman has warned a series of isolated downward economic trends around the world will spiral into an unavoidable global recession towards the end of 2019 or the beginning of next year. Mr Krugman said there is not “one big thing” prompting the stark forecast but instead blamed a number of incidents happening at the same time. He said a slump in the eurozone combined with the long-running US-China trade war, President Trump’s tax policy and world leaders’ lack of preparedness are increasing the risks of a worldwide economic slowdown.
Related articles German finance minister ADMITS budget pressures - recession fears grow Expert warns EU of Eurozone risks - 'Any hard Brexit threatens euro!'
Mr Krugman’s warning comes despite policymakers expressing hope growth will pick up before an outright recession hits.
Nevertheless, most economists and many of the world’s top business leaders are preparing for the worst.
Speaking at the World Government Summit in Dubai, Mr Krugman said: "I think that there is a quite good chance that we will have a recession late this year or next year.”
The 65-year-old, who won the Nobel Prize for Economics in 2008 for his work on new economic geography, blasted Donald Trump’s programme of tax cuts as “not very effective”.
He added the tech growth which has been expanding for decades is “starting to look like the bubble may be deflating”.
Mr Krugman also pointed to the euro as a stumbling block.
He said: “The place that looks really close to recession right now is the euro area.”
Last week the European Commission significantly downgraded its economic growth forecast for 2019.
Related articles Pound LIVE: GBP Sterling SURGES against euro as Germany in 'RECESSION' Italy crisis: Industrial production falls AGAIN - fears over recession
Mr Krugman said Donald Trump's tax cuts are 'not very effective'
Brussels said it expects to see a slow to 1.3 percent, down from 1.9 percent last year.
Mr Krugman also blamed world leaders for not making enough preparations for a snap economic downtown.
He said: "The main concern has always been that we don't have an effective response if stuff slows down.”
The news came as UK growth was revealed to have limped along at just 0.2 percent in the last quarter of 2018.
The world renowned economist also said the Eurozone slump is contributing to recession fears
Figures for October to December last year, released today, showed the British economy has stalled from 0.6 percent growth in the summer.
Annual GDP was just 1.4 percent, its weakest since beginning to recover from the 2008 global financial crash.
The Chancellor has blamed the uncertainty surrounding whether Britain will secure a deal with the European Union before March 29.
With just 46 days to go until Brexit Day, an optimistic Philip Hammond told the Evening Standard: “I’m very confident that over the next few week we will be in a position to move forward, to remove this uncertainty and allow everybody to get on with their lives.”
