 This month has brought the launch of our all-island EY Economic Eye report in which we presented our forecasts and commentary for both the Northern Ireland and Republic of Ireland economies. It is a busy time for the team as we update our models and pick through the spreadsheets of data and decide what is relevant for our clients.
Whilst I hope readers find the whole document interesting, it was, perhaps, unsurprising that much of the coverage of the report focused on our projection that a no-deal outcome at the end of March could push the Northern Ireland economy into a period of recession.
The 'R' word stirs up emotions and, given the ongoing negotiations, care must be taken with its use.
On the face of it, a region with modest growth rates currently in the 1-1.5% range slipping into recession in the face of a major economic shock should hardly be surprising but, understandably, it is newsworthy.
The Economic Eye report articulates how difficult it is to estimate the impact of a no-deal outcome for Northern Ireland.
That begs the question: how much reliance can we place on the results of such an exercise and do they help? To give you a flavour of why modelling no-deal is complicated, here are just a selection of the factors to consider and quantify: Currency: How will the currency react? What is already priced in? Substitution effects: How easily can firms find new customers if their products become uncompetitive in current markets? Will consumers be willing to substitute for other products in the face of price changes? Elasticities: How price sensitive are particular goods? Can firms pass any tariff costs on to the customer? How does this impact inflation levels? Non-tariff costs: How significant are they likely to be and what sectors will be impacted? Stock building and preparation investment: How much of an economic boost will come from spending on building up stocks or investing in staff to prepare for Brexit? Migration: How will migration be impacted by policy and economic changes brought about by Brexit? Government response: What will government do with any tariff revenue, where will it spend it and what other actions might It take to mitigate impact? Other factors: What other factors might be in play that need to be disentangled from the effects being considered? For example — the health of the global economy. Confidence: should confidence effects for businesses and consumers be modelled? Does the lack of an immediate post referendum vote recession in the UK tell us that too much weight can be placed on such effects? You might think, given all the complexity in trying to consider the impact, that this diminishes its value.
As a committed economic forecaster, you will not be surprised to hear that I do not concur with this view.
The very process of building models and crafting scenarios requires careful thought and consideration of all the factors listed above (and more).
This brings a discipline to one's thinking and ensures that the various interactions between different factors are considered.
Carried out correctly, it can surprise and inform and it should have the power to change a previously held view.
For example, in the analysis carried out for the Economic Eye report, the impact of higher consumer prices faced by consumers — and what that does to an already relatively fragile consumer sector — was more pronounced than perhaps I felt would be the case before the numbers were crunched.
There are countless different types of economic models and reams of journal articles about their various merits or otherwise but, for me, the key is not the level of complexity that matters most — it is the logic it enforces and the discipline it brings to any 'what if?' question.
When I am discussing forecasts with clients and taking them though the scenarios that can help them plan, to use a terrible cliche, it is as much about the journey as the destination. What drives the forecast? How do we expect the various building blocks of the economy to react to the changes predicted? This can stimulate lively debate and allow companies to gauge the scale of change with which they might expect to have to deal in the particular component of the economy that drives their own business.
Scenario planning remains the correct course in planning for Brexit.
Economic models have their limitations and are only one piece of evidence that should be used in considering potential impacts, but they do provide a framework to think about all the moving parts that will impact upon the future.
Every model update tells me something new.
I find new surprises in the data or I question something I believed to be true.
Maybe the no-deal recession outcome was the Economic Eye headline, but the real value for me was analysing the building blocks that lead to that possible and, hopefully, avoidable, outcome.
In next week's Economy Watch, we hear from Andrew Webb of Baker Tilly Mooney Moore
