 The Federal Reserve has indicated that it is done raising interest rates for now, fuelling a market rally.
Officials voted to hold their benchmark rate steady on Wednesday and delivered an about-face from their policy stance six weeks earlier. Last month, they raised their benchmark rate by a quarter of a percentage point to a range between 2.25 per cent and 2.5 per cent and signalled two more rises were likely this year.
“The case for raising rates has weakened somewhat,” Fed chairman Jerome Powell said at a news conference after the central bank’s latest policy meeting.
He declined to say whether the Fed’s next rate move was more likely to be an increase or a cut. “It’s going to depend entirely on the data,” he said.
Stocks, which were already rallying on earnings reports from Apple and Boeing, extended their gains after the statement. The Dow Jones Industrial Average closed up 435 points, or 1.8 per cent. The yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note fell to 2.694 per cent, from about 2.73 per cent before the announcement. Bond yields fall as prices rise and have stabilised following their December slide, with analysts more confident in the US economy.
It was the opposite of what unfolded before and after the Fed’s December meeting. Stocks had been sliding heading into that meeting and tumbled even further after the Fed raised its short-term rates and signalled it expected to lift them more in 2019 and beyond. Bond yields slid as investors grew more concerned the Fed was likely to push borrowing costs higher than the economy could handle.
On Wednesday, Mr Powell cited growing risks of a sharp US economic slowdown due to cooling growth in Europe and Asia. He also said officials were paying close attention to policy-related headwinds from trade disputes, Brexit and the potential for future US government shutdowns. “These risks are going to be with us for a while,” Mr Powell said.
Central bank officials had been reluctant to signal such a pause in interest-rate increases until recently because US economic data has been strong and, until last northern autumn, asset markets were buoyant, fuelling worries about potential financial bubbles.
Fed officials now face more contradictory data: the US job market has been steadily adding jobs, but manufacturing and some interest rate-sensitive sectors of the economy, such as housing, have slowed. Officials are essentially stepping to the sidelines until the picture is less muddy.
“This was the full pivot,” said Diane Swonk, chief economist at Grant Thornton. “They listened, they’re awake at the wheel and they’re willing to take it easy.” Mr Powell faced a tricky balancing act in highlighting the growing risks to the expansion without alarming markets. The central bank usually says definitively in its policy statements whether it sees risks to the economy as balanced, or tilted towards strength or weakness.
The fact that officials didn’t offer an assessment of risks to the outlook highlighted doubts they now have about the economic ­impact of tumbling stock and oil prices, weak growth abroad and political uncertainty.
“They are catching up finally to the signs that the trade war could matter, and that they just need to be more cautious,” said Seth Carpenter, chief economist at UBS and a former Fed economist.
The Fed underscored its more-flexible posture by providing key updates about its policy of shrinking its $US4 trillion ($$5.5 trillion) asset portfolio, which swelled after the 2008 global financial crisis during stimulus campaigns.
The central bank said officials had agreed on a critical operational matter that would effectively require the central bank to maintain a larger stock of Treasury securities than had been expected when they began reducing those holdings 16 months ago.
They also showed greater willingness to change the pace of the portfolio reduction if the economy weakens. About $US40 billion in Treasury and mortgage securities are running off the Fed’s balance sheet every month.
While the Fed prefers to use adjustments to its benchmark federal-funds rate to actively provide more or less support to the economy, “occasional changes could be warranted” to the balance-sheet policy depending on developments in the economy or in financial markets, Mr Powell said.Fed officials began laying the groundwork for a pause in rate increases earlier this month, pointing to little evidence of building price pressures that had justified earlier rate rises.
