 Amna Bklezi started her own home-cooking business with a microloan from Microfund for Women, a Tanmeyah microfinance network enterprise (Image courtesy of European Investment Fund)
AMMAN — Microfinance in Jordan provides tens of thousands of jobs and can potentially benefit millions of Jordanians still, according to representatives of the sector in the previous article of this two-piece series on the microfinance paradox, which you can find published in Monday’s edition.
Although growing remarkably, at 10 per cent in 2017, the sector accounts for no more than 1 per cent of the country’s overall banking and finance sector’s credit facilities in 2017, according to the Central Bank of Jordan (CBJ).
Microfinance institutions (MFIs) are non-profit enterprises seeking to building economic capacity in “undeserved locations” (see part 1), beyond urban centres, and further the implementation of CBJ’s financial inclusion strategy.
However, MFIs still face various challenges that negatively affect the overall outcome and benefit of the sector’s operations.
On one hand, there is the issue of the unregulated microfinance sector, whose predatory practices are hurting both the borrower and the sector as an industry. No one government institution has agreed to take responsibility for it; neither the Ministry of Industry, Trade and Supply nor the Central Bank.
On the other, there are structural issues within the formal sector itself, affecting sectoral profitability and sustainability.
“In 2018, the microfinance sector had more than 300,000 active clients across the Kingdom,” Ziad Rifai, vice chairman of the Jordan Microfinance Network, Tanmeyah; former 12-year director of Tamweelcom; and CEO of Ethmar, Jordan’s first Islamic microfinance enterprise, told The Jordan Times.
Most of those are in the governorates, approximately 70 per cent, CBJ data show.
Against all the odds, Rifai and other sector officials have underlined in part one of the microfinance paradox, that the formal sector seems to be doing a good job keeping itself in check.
Tanmeyah’s leading portfolio in Maan grew at a remarkable 22 per cent by the end of the third quarter of 2018. The portfolio of active borrows grew 26 per cent, with a portfolio-at-risk (PAR) rate of no more than 0.4 per cent, the network’s figures show.
The second greatest growth was in Mafraq, at 18 per cent, with an active borrower’s portfolio growth rate of 13 per cent and a clean PAR; that is “no bad debt”.
The quality of the Portfolio is a major concern for MFIs, Tanmeyah Executive Director Saleem Nammari said.
So far, PAR30 (inactive and unpaid loans for more than 30 days) and written off debts do not comprise more than 1.8 per cent and 0.34 per cent of the network’s overall portfolio, respectively, he underscored.
In terms of impact, formal MFIs have helped create more than 80,000 jobs through more than 1.3 million beneficiaries across Jordan, Nammari said.
Shafea Kayed, a former microfinance credit officer at Cairo Amman Bank, said: “These microcredit facilities are the lifeline of some small businesses and families, whose members are unemployed or whose salaries are below elegibility criteria,” and this is where it gets a little tricky.
Microfinance enterprises borrow money in bulk from the major commercial banks, as well as donors, at rates lower than the market interest rate, Kayed highlighted, but not significantly so, Rifai and Nammari contended.
The interest rates at which they eventually lend out the money are much higher than the banks’, Kayed said.
“True, our rates are higher. But that is only because we borrow from commercial banks at a slightly discounted rate, at best. In general, the bank’s 9 per cent is our ground zero; our baseline. We do not borrow at ‘interbank rates’,” Nammari argued.
Banks, however, borrow from each other at significantly lower costs. The interest rate on loans by one commercial bank to another is called the “interbank rate”, which is dramatically lower than the market interest rate.
According to economist Mazen Marji, banks have diverse investment portfolios, and billions in deposits to move around. MFIs do not, Nammari responded.
Banks and MFIs operate on very different premises, Marji added.
“While both are financial institutions, the prior has massive investment portfolios and diverse streams of revenue. Meanwhile, MFIs get their money mostly from commercial bank loans, in addition to the occasional grant or donation,” he said.
“The only way for microfinance enterprises to grow their capital, in order to sustain operations and expand to reach more Jordanians and achieve their ‘developmental’ objectives, is to profit from the single and sole profit generating operation; loans,” Marji explained.
Meanwhile, the most pressing internal issues facing the sector are taxation and short-sighted regulatory policies, Nammari and Rifai concur.
