 THERESA May agreeing to a soft Brexit deal could damage UK-EU relations for a generation and spark “seismic political instability” across the continent, economists claim in a book.
Last week, Jeremy Corbyn wrote to Theresa May and laid out what commitments he is seeking in exchange for offering Labour support. The five demands include a continued customs union with the EU, “close alignment” with the bloc’s single market and a commitment to mirror workers' rights and environmental protections passed in Brussels. However, on Monday, Downing Street made it clear that Britain "must have an independent trade policy" and stressed that the Prime Minister will never consider Jeremy Corbyn’s proposal of a departure deal involving customs union membership.
Related articles Macron minister admits EU to face BIGGER challenges than UK exit EU BOMBSHELL: The STAGGERING amount the Commission is REALLY paid
Despite Mrs May's opposition, Prisons minister, Rory Stewart, insisted there was nonetheless “a lot of common ground” between the parties, sparking fears among hardline Brexiteers that a soft Brexit could be on the way.
In 2018 book “Clean Brexit: Why Leaving the EU still makes sense”, authors and economists Liam Halligan and Gerard Lyons claimed that pursuing soft Brexit would eventually generate a “seismic political crisis” across Europe.
They wrote: “Since the general election in June 2017, many, mostly Labour Party, politicians have been calling for soft Brexit - combining single market membership with UK controls on migration from the EU.
“While sounding attractive, this outcome almost certainly is not available and, if the UK did manage somehow to achieve it after an extremely heated negotiation, it could spark seismic political instability across the EU, as populations in other member states demanded the same deal.
Corbyn's “Soft Brexit” could damage UK-EU relations for a generation, a book claims
Theresa May ruled out Mr Corbyn’s proposal of a departure deal involving customs union membership
“Soft Brexit would anyway still mean UK law remains under the jurisdiction of the ECJ along with continued multi-billion-pound payments to Brussels - in sum, a betrayal of the referendum result.”
Mr Halligan and Mr Lyons noted that "soft Brexit would be equal to a messy Brexit" as it would spark a political conflict across the continent and risk "setting back UK-EU relations for a generation".
They referred to those pursuing this route as "either disingenuous, politically naïve, or both".
The authors then argued that it would make far more sense to pursue a clean Brexit, accepting that "Britain will be outside the single market and the customs union - a position that benefits an open, services-oriented economy".
Corbyn wrote to Theresa May and laid out what commitments he is seeking
They added: "Other large economies conduct extensive EU trade from outside the single market and the UK can do the same.
"Outside the customs union we can also cut trade deals with nations beyond the EU, many of which have far better growth prospects than Europe.
"Leaving the single market and the customs union isn’t Hard Brexit. It is Brexit.
"The Hard Brexit label, designed to make leaving the EU sound extreme and unreasonable, is used by those determined to reverse the referendum result."
