 The sharpest fall in home loans since the depths of the global financial crisis has prompted calls for the Reserve Bank to slice interest rates and has cast doubt over the state of the budget leading into the federal election.
As NAB said the Reserve may have to cut rates within months, figures from the Australian Bureau of Statistics revealed first-time buyers and investors are deserting the property market, in a sign house prices may fall further.
Home loans in December fell by 5.9 per cent. It was the second-largest monthly fall since 2008-09, while the annual fall of 19.8 per cent was the worst since the global financial crisis.
Investor loans have tumbled 28 per cent over the past year, while those for owner-occupiers have slumped by 16 per cent. Since a peak in mid-2015, investor lending has dropped by almost 48 per cent.
First home buyers have been a key part of the market over the past year as they have taken advantage of falling prices, but even they are now resisting the chance to enter the market. The number of loans to first-time buyers fell 8 per cent in the month to be 12 per cent lower over the past year.
<loc>NSW</loc> and <loc>Victoria</loc> are leading the national market down, with sharp falls in total loan numbers through last year. It's not just housing. Business loans dropped by 9.7 per cent in December to be 6.2 per cent lower over the year. The closely watched NAB business survey also pointed to weaknesses across the broader economy.
While there was a lift in January from sharp falls in its December survey, NAB found the retail sector across cars, food and household goods at its weakest level since 2014.
Business capacity utilisation fell for the third consecutive month and is now around its long-term average, in a development that could point to a softer jobs market.
NAB chief economist Alan Oster said the survey, on top of weak inflation and growing headwinds for households, meant substantial risks for the economy and the Reserve Bank's interest rate settings.
The bank had expected the RBA to start lifting interest rates from their 1.5 per cent setting some time next year. NAB now believes there is little chance of a rate rise in the forseeable future, with a bigger risk of the Reserve slicing borrowing costs in the second half of this year.
UBS economist George Tharenou said there was now a risk of national house prices falling 14 per cent from their recent peak. UBS previously forecast a 10 per cent drop in prices.
