 NATIONAL Australia Bank economists can no longer foresee a time when the Reserve Bank might hike the cash rate, joining those who believe there could be a cut this year.
Economists at the bank said yesterday that they no longer expected the RBA to hike rates in late 2020 – a prediction they made late last year.
“We … now expect the cash rate to remain on hold over the forecast horizon,” the bank’s economists wrote in a report for investors.
“While our central case is for the cash rate to remain on hold, based on the balance of risk, the next move could well be down – potentially as soon as (the next half).” The RBA has kept the cash rate at an all-time low 1.5 per cent since August 2016 but last week shifted from a bias toward rate hikes to a more neutral stance. NAB’s economists said signs pointed to weakness in the Australian economy, especially in retail spending as consumers faced significant issues.
“In particular, we see ongoing slow wage growth, falling savings rates, high debt levels and falling house prices as ongoing headwinds,” NAB said in a note authored by chief economist Alan Oster, global head of research Ivan Colhoun and senior economist Gareth Spence. NAB’s team joins an increasing number of economists flagging a potential rate cut this year, with many having suggested the move long before the RBA downgraded its economic forecasts last week.
“Our forecasts raise the question as to why the RBA would not move to give the economy some further support,” they said.
The trio predicted wage growth to increase gradually but expected only modest decreases in unemployment, and forecast house prices to keep falling in Melbourne and Sydney, “but to do so in an orderly fashion”.
Meanwhile, results released yesterday from NAB’s monthly survey of 400 businesses indicated business confidence remained below average despite edging up last month after falling sharply in December. NAB said its business survey found confidence was weakest in Victoria and NSW, and higher in South Australia and Western Australia.
“While we don’t think activity in the business sector has crashed, we think that there has been some loss in momentum,” Mr Oster said, adding that was especially so among retail businesses.“Car sales and household goods continue to show the weakest and falling conditions in our survey – this is consistent with the broader macro story at present.” – AAP
