 WASHINGTON—Growth picked up for U.S. manufacturers in January, a sign strong factory-sector demand and output overrode uncertainty surrounding the partial government shutdown in the first month of the year.
The Institute for Supply Management's manufacturing purchasing managers index rose to 56.6 in January from 54.3 in December. That surpassed economists' expectations for a decline in the index to 54.0. Readings above 50 indicate expansion whereas readings below that level denote contraction.
The index is "transitioning from a very high level of expansion, to expansion," said Tim Fiore, who oversees the ISM survey of factory purchasing and supply managers.
The January reading followed a sharp drop in the index for December, which raised concerns that the globally-sensitive manufacturing sector was slowing due to a weak global economy and cooling consumer sentiment. The decline in the ISM index for December marked the largest one-month drop since the end of 2008.
"It seems that the hand-wringing over a sustained sharp slowdown in the factory sector may have been a bit premature," Omair Sharif, an economist at Société Générale, said in a note to clients after Friday's release.
The survey was taken before the end of the recent partial government shutdown, and some respondents cited that as a hindrance to business last month. A dispute over funding for a wall at the U.S. southern border led to a 35-day shutdown that ended on Jan. 25.
Other ISM respondents voiced concern about trade tensions with China, and said tariffs remain a concern for potential future growth.
The U.S. and China are seeking to resolve their tariff dispute ahead of a March 1 deadline. At 12:01 a.m. the following day, tariffs on $200 billion of Chinese goods are scheduled to jump to 25% from the current 10%. The higher levies could batter U.S. importers and further harm an already weakening Chinese economy.
In a recent survey by the Wall Street Journal, economists said a big slowdown in China's economy and slower growth in Europe are holding back the U.S. , reducing demand for American exports and making companies more reluctant to begin long-term projects.
Write to Harriet Torry at harriet.torry@wsj.com
