 PROSPECTS OF MORE RATE CUTS BRIGHTEN
In twin reliefs for the economy, retail inflation eased to an 18-month low at the start of the new year and industrial output growth picked up in December from a 17-month low in November.
Inflation, as measured by the Consumer Price Index (CPI), cooled to 2.05% in January, data released by the statistics department on Tuesday showed. The previous low for consumer inflation was 1.46% in June 2017.
The simultaneously released Index of Industrial Production was up 2.4% in December. Industrial growth was 0.3% in November, revised down from 0.5% estimated initially. The decline in inflation validates the Reserve Bank of <loc>India</loc>'s decision last week to lower the benchmark repo rate by 25 basis points, the first rate cut in 17 months.
Retail inflation has stayed below the RBI's mediumterm target of 4% for the fifth straight month and has opened up the possibility of more rate cuts with industrial growth remaining tepid. "While there is a case for another rate cut in case inflation remains low, the call would also take into account upcoming elections where the savings perspective may be considered," said CARE Ratings chief economist Madan Sabnavis.
The six-member monetary policy committee chaired by RBI governor Shaktikanta Das had changed the stance to 'neutral' from 'calibrated tightening' in its review last week. The persistent cold weather is likely to play a key role in inflation.
"Extended winter remains supportive of decelerating food prices," said Yes Bank chief economist Shubhada Rao. "This raises the probability of rate cut(s) in April and beyond too."
A decline in food prices helped ease overall consumer inflation. Retail food prices rose 2.17% in January from a year earlier, slower than 2.65% in December. The Central Statistics Office revised the headline inflation for December to 2.11% from 2.19% earlier.
In the food category, inflation eased in vegetables, sugar and eggs, highlighting the stress in agriculture. The government had announced a ?6,000 annual income transfer scheme for small farmers in the interim budget on February 1. Certain non-food components showed higher rates of inflation -- housing was at 5.2% and paan, tobacco and intoxicants at 5.62%. Others were moderate -- fuel and light inflation stood at 2.2% and that for clothing and footwear at 2.95%.
"The fuel component too has surprised on the downside. This along with core inflation at 5.36% presents a scenario of CPI y-o-y (year-on-year) between 2-3% over the next five months," Rao said.
FACTORY OUTPUT UP
Industrial growth recovered from the lows of November on the back of a rise in manufacturing. Manufacturing, which constitutes 77.63% of the IIP, grew 2.7% in December while electricity generation was up 4.4%. Mining output fell 1%.
Consumer durables output increased 2.9%, faster than 2.1% in December last year. Capital goods registered growth of 5.9% compared with13.2% a year earlier. There was growth in 13 of the 23 industry groups in the manufacturing sector.
In the first nine months of the current fiscal (April to December), IIP growth is higher at 4.6%, compared with 3.7% in the year earlier.
"While the government's investment spending is gradually taking a backseat, given the push to consumption, capacity utilisation should improve and private sector investments should start looking up," said Crisil chief economist DK Joshi.
Passenger vehicle sales remained muted and declined 1.8% in January in line with the lower growth expected in the second half of the year.
