 TOKYO—China's factories are trimming investment, but consumers are still spending more on some luxury and everyday items.
That is the message from corporate results in Japan, a key indicator of the Chinese economy. The results suggest tech-related companies have been hurt by U.S.-China trade tensions and a slowdown in the smartphone business, but Chinese consumers are making other purchases.
"Our same-store sales [in China] have been making double-digit growth so we haven't seen any impact on consumption," said Tadashi Yanai, the chief executive of Uniqlo clothing store operator Fast Retailing Co., in an interview.
Japanese companies' operating profit fell 2.5% in the October-December quarter compared with the same period last year, Fidelity International said based on data from securities firms. A few companies have yet to report.
Weaker exports to China played a big role in the profit decline. The biggest impact came from the electronics, automobile and machinery sectors of Japan's economy, which represent more than 50% of Japan's exports to China and about one-third of the Nikkei 225's market capitalization, according to Vanguard.
The fund giant recently downgraded Japan's 2019 growth outlook. Japan has "one of the highest exposures among developed economies" to China, said Qian Wang, chief economist for Asia-Pacific with Vanguard.
Panasonic Corp. on Feb. 4 reduced its operating-profit forecast by 9.4% for the year ending in March, citing China troubles, including lower sales of consumer products such as refrigerators. Some U.S. companies have had similar troubles .
"As economic sentiment deteriorated in China, demand for capital investment declined sharply and sales of our motors and other related components dropped," said Hirokazu Umeda, chief financial officer at Panasonic, whose businesses include auto parts. "We expect that would be the trend in China for now and we should remain vigilant."
Yet other Japanese consumer-oriented companies are reporting double-digit growth from their China operations. Skin-care company Kose Corp.'s sales in China grew 45% in the most recently reported quarter—July-September 2018—driven by the high-end Decorté brand. And digital-piano maker Yamaha Corp. reported 15% growth in sales of musical instruments in China in the October-December quarter.
"There was growth within all categories of instruments, but piano sales were especially promising," said Satoshi Yamahata, an executive at Yamaha.
"People want to continue investing in education. It's seen as a cultural investment," said Jeremy Osborne, investment director of Fidelity International in Japan.
Signs that there is still hope for growth in China have helped prop up stock prices. The Nikkei Stock Average ended up 1.3% at 21144.48 on Wednesday and has now risen 5.6% in February, after China worries sparked sharp falls late last year.
Analysts said the China situation—including the state of U.S.-China trade talks with a deadline coming up next month—was likely to weigh on investors this year and next.
Shinichi Ichikawa, chief market strategist at Credit Suisse Securities, said overall corporate earnings in Japan may end up falling 5% to 10% in the year ending March 2019. Economists are also worried about inventory piling up at Japanese exporters, which could hit corporate investment and in turn cast a pall over the entire economy, said Tomohiro Ota, Japan economist at Goldman Sachs.
River Davis and Megumi Fujikawa contributed to this article.
Write to Suryatapa Bhattacharya at Suryatapa.Bhattacharya@wsj.com
