 AN economist has rubbished claims migration to the UK from non-EU countries will double after Brexit, accusing a think tank of mistaking its numbers and using “scaremongering” tactics.
Migration Watch said Mr Javid's plans would open up nine million UK jobs to non-EU workers
Jonathan Portes, professor of economics at King’s College in London, refused to buy into the claims by Migration Watch UK which said the number of workers arriving in Britain from outside the EU could top half a million after Brexit. Migration Watch said net migration - not including the number of Britons heading abroad - which peaked at 372,000 in 2015, could be smashed if Sajid Javid’s proposals are not recalled. It warned that half a million migrants could pour into the country every year after the UK leaves the EU.
Related articles EU rules on migration are FAILING, says France’s former asylum chief Switzerland to impose immigration QUOTA for working Brits after Brexit
Mr Portes said the number of visas granted may not be equal to those entering Britain
The Home Secretary’s post-Brexit border controls include scrapping caps on overseas workers allowed to find jobs in Britain.
Mr Portes said Migration Watch had made a “stupid mistake” by basing its predictions on the number of visas granted to migrants - a number which does not necessarily match those entering Britain.
Mr Portes said: “You don’t need to know a lot about migration to see they’ve got their numbers wrong.
“It is clear they don’t know what they are talking about. It’s absolutely absurd to suggest that non-EU migration is going to double as a result of what is said in the White Paper.
“I thought that they had obviously made a mistake and have not even bothered to check their report.
“They have confused the number of visas with migration form outside the EU.”
He added: “It’s obvious this is just a stupid mistake.
“They should delete the report and apologise for misleading the people."
Related articles 'Cover up' over bill for stopping illegal immigrants MI6 use migrant crisis to smuggle Iran nuclear scientist into Britain
Mr Javid's plans would scrap caps on overseas workers looking for work in the UK
While he acknowledged it would be difficult to forecast how non-EU migration to the UK would be affected by Brexit, the professor said it is likely the number of skilled migrants from outside Europe would rise due to the liberalisation of Britain’s border laws.
Under Mr Javid’s plans, British businesses will not have to advertise jobs in the country before seeking people from overseas to fill the posts.
Migration Watch predicts net migration will soar to 430,000 per year after Brexit or could even "approach half a million a year” - making nine million British jobs available to workers from across the globe.
In response to the think tank’s report, Mr Portes tweeted: “How do they get these incredible numbers, you ask?
“Answer: through some basic errors in arithmetic, plus added scaremongering.”
