 TOKYO—The Japanese economy rebounded in the final quarter of 2018 thanks to solid spending by households and companies, but some economists said worries about China and weaker spending might limit growth this year.
The world's third-largest economy after the U.S. and China expanded at an annualized pace of 1.4% in the October-December period following a 2.6% contraction in the previous quarter, roughly in line with economists' forecasts.
"Growth in the October-December period was led by domestic demand, but Japan may not be able to keep high levels of consumption and capital expenditures in the January-March period," said Daiwa Securities economist Mari Iwashita. "It is possible that the economy would shrink again in the current quarter."
Private consumption, which accounts for nearly 60% of gross domestic product, increased 0.6% on quarter in the fourth quarter, while capital expenditures rose 2.4% as companies shook off the effects of natural disasters. The economy shrank in the previous quarter partly due to a typhoon that closed a major airport and an earthquake that left the northern island of Hokkaido without electricity for two days.
Ms. Iwashita said relatively warm weather recently might reduce purchases of winter clothes in the current quarter, while recent sluggishness in exports could make companies more hesitant to make capital investments.
Exports, an engine of the Japanese economy, subtracted 0.3 percentage point from growth in the October-December quarter, showing the impact of the U.S.-China trade conflict and the overall slowdown in the Chinese economy .
"Risk is tilted toward the downside, in our view, with further economic slowdown in China and around the globe and a deterioration in sentiment due to trade friction as the main downside risk factors," said Goldman Sachs economist Naohiko Baba.
Recent earnings announcements by Japanese companies indicated China's economic slowdown has already hit manufacturers , such as Apple Inc. supplier Nidec Corp. and electronics firm Panasonic Corp. Both reduced their profit forecasts for the year ending in March.
Nominal employee compensation rose 3.2% in the October-December period from a year earlier on the back of larger winter bonuses. "In spite of that, real GDP growth and the pace of price increases lack speed," said Takuji Aida, an economist at Société Générale.
He said the Bank of Japan was likely to stick to its zero target for the 10-year Japanese government bond yield until 2021 given the uncertain economic outlook.
Write to Megumi Fujikawa at megumi.fujikawa@wsj.com
