 UK factories are stockpiling more goods than every before as they brace for Brexit disruption despite the manufacturing sector being at a point of “near-stagnation” according to new figures on Friday.
There has been increasing anecdotal evidence that companies are creating buffers as the March 29 Brexit deadline draws closer. On Thursday Unilever said it had hired special refrigeration units to stockpile Magnums and Ben & Jerry’s ice cream.
But the efforts now appears to have become more widespread as companies worry about the disruption to their supply chains.
In January inventories grew at the fastest rate in 27 years of surveys, according to the Purchasing Managers Index, compiled by IHS Markit.
Economists and trade experts have, however, warned that there is only so much that many businesses can do. At the World Economic Forun in Davos last month, Mark Carney, the governor of the Bank of England, said there was only a “limited amount” that businesses could do to prepare for a hard Brexit as manufacturing companies “can’t stack things all over Wales” to ensure they have the parts needed to overcome any supply disruption.
“There are a series of logistical problems that need to be solved and it’s quite transparent that they’re not,” he said.
The IHS suvery also showed that business optimism has sunk to a 30-month low, as poor figures from the major eurozone economies and uncertainty over Brexit weighed on outlook.
Rob Dobson at IHS Markit said that poor economic performance from continental neighbours and political concerns meant there was “a clear risk of manufacturing sliding into recession”.
The overall score for UK factories, on a scale where any number above 50 indicates growth, was 52.8, a three-month low. This was worse than expected by economists whose average forecast was 53.5 - considerably closer to December’s figure of 54.2.
James Knightley of ING said that, as both order and output for factories slowed, any sign of positive growth was almost certainly down to such significant levels of stockpiling.
Other economists agreed that the growth indicated by the headline figure was due to inventories building up, rather than output rising.
Samuel Tombs of Pantheon MacroEconomics said: “Contingency planning for a no-deal Brexit is providing only limited support to manufacturers at a time of weakening underlying demand, both in the domestic and export markets.”
While the UK’s figures might have been better that those for the eurozone, which fell for the third consecutive month, this was also only a result of Brexit preparations, he added.
Stockpiling was expected to continue in the months ahead of the deadline to exit the EU, as political deadlock in Westminster persists.
