 China delivered a happy Valentine's Day gift on Thursday, with trade data that far exceeded market forecasts—a rare upside surprise from the world's second-largest economy. Investors shouldn't respond with bouquets of flowers just yet, however.
The strong figures may in part be down to the February Lunar New Year holiday falling 11 days earlier this year than last. Factories likely rushed to fulfill orders last month, ahead of the weeklong shutdown. Overall, Chinese exports rose 9.1% from a year ago in January, while economists were expecting a 3.2% drop, according to Refinitiv. Imports, meanwhile, fell 1.5%, still much better than the forecast 10% decline.
Looking at one month's trade numbers may have limited value anyway. The strong January data followed a horrendously bad December, when exports and imports fell the most since late 2016 —against economists' forecasts for growth. On a three-month-average basis, Chinese exports and imports are still on a notable downtrend.
Other recent data from China have remained weak: The January purchasing managers index showed manufacturing activity contracting for the second month in a row. Another Asian export powerhouse, Korea, reported weak trade data for January on Thursday, suggesting the strong Chinese figures may be an outlier that doesn't mean global demand has suddenly improved.
For sure, some details are encouraging. The overall drop in Chinese imports last month was driven by a double-digit decline in goods imported to make end products for re-export, such as smartphones. "Normal" imports— those consumed in China—actually rose a little, consistent with the picture of Chinese demand slowing but not collapsing.
The muted market response in China suggests nerves are still high about what happens next. The mood around the U.S.-China trade talks appears to be improving, but there is plenty of time left for talks to be derailed. More important, the extent to which Beijing can stimulate its own economy remains unclear. Any positive effect from monetary and fiscal policy easing has been offset by a crackdown on shadow banking that is starving private companies of funds.
One nice card doesn't make a relationship; one piece of good economic data doesn't mean all is suddenly well again. Investors need more signs China is on a committed path to recovery.
Write to Jacky Wong at JACKY.WONG@wsj.com and Andrew Peaple at andrew.peaple@wsj.com
