 Australia faces a one-in-five chance of going into a recession during the next term of government, as China and the US face economic slowdowns and workers' wages go nowhere fast, compounding historically high levels of household debt.
The verdict, from The Sydney Morning Herald and The Age Scope economic survey of 18 leading market, academic and industry economists, will spark concerns among Labor and Liberal leadership teams, as both parties head into the May election vowing to fight over their economic credentials.
The economists found that many of the risks were beyond the control of Australian policymakers - as "global financial markets enter a secular bear market phase," spooked by $350 billion worth of trade tensions between the world's two largest economies.
"If China sneezes, Australia will catch pneumonia given household debt levels and the lack of other drives in this economy," said former treasury official and Industry Super chief economist Stephen Anthony. "United States trade tactics heighten this risk."
Australia's economic growth is unlikely to get past 2.5 per cent for the year to June, the average of the economists' forecasts, while wages will be lucky to get above their current rate of 2.3 per cent.
Falling house prices are likely to continue to be a crimp on the economy, constraining spending throughout 2019 as nervous home-owners shut their wallets. In one of the more pessimistic takes on the economy's future, Monash University economist Jakob Madsen said real GDP growth was likely to decline to 2 per cent in 2019 over 2018 and further down to 1.5 per cent in 2020. "This is because of a reduced growth in per capita income and reduced population growth induced by a reduced intake of immigrants," he said. "Furthermore, a likely slight increase in unemployment and the introduction of artificial intelligence will also keep the wage growth down - at least for workers in the low-income bracket."
Stephen Koukoulas from Market Economics was more optimistic. "2020 should see a more meaningful pick-up in growth, aided by easier policy, stronger business investment and a bottoming in the housing market," he said.
"Wages growth will remain low, around 2.5 per cent."
Others said economic conventions would need to be re-written to account for the historically low level of wage growth. "We are mindful of the international experience which suggests that you need a sustained period of sub 5 per cent unemployment and low underemployment to generate firmer wages growth with a clear flattening out of the Phillips curve," said RBC markets' Su-Lin Ong. The Phillips curve is a half-a-century old model that suggests higher employment must eventually lead to higher wages.
Kingston University's Steve Keen said China was the enigma in the global outlook.
It is suffering a credit crunch but government spending for infrastructure on its multinational Belt and Road push is masking the effect, keeping up demand for Australian materials. He said he expected "a mild recession in the USA starting in mid to late 2019, which would affect us".
Former Treasury secretary Ken Henry said late last year he would not be surprised if he saw a US recession courtesy of an over-stimulating Trump administration which has delivered billions of dollars in extra tax cuts and infrastructure quickly growing economy.
"I think the US is looking at a period of weakness from where it is now, it is very strong now but it is looking at a period of weakness and it doesn't have the fiscal armoury it needs," he said. "I don't want to call a US recession but I wouldn't be surprised by one shortly. If the US wanted to expand its fiscal deficit further it would have to rely on Asian central banks, including China, to buy US treasuries and at the moment it's not a good idea to have a war with them, a trade war."
Australian Industry Group's Julie Toth said looming disruptions in financial markets in the UK and Europe could turn out to be just as significant for Australia as slower growth in China, Japan and the US. The average of the 18 economists found US growth would slow to 3 per cent from 3.4 per cent by June. Professor Keen had the highest odds of an Australian recession by June 2021, at 95 per cent, with Mr Anthony the second highest at 55 per cent. The average was 21 per cent.
