 Retail stocks tumbled Thursday after an important measure of consumer spending slumped over the holiday season, raising the stakes for the industry's upcoming earnings season.
The S&P 500 Retailing index, which includes stocks such as e-commerce giant Amazon.com Inc., department-store operator Nordstrom Inc. and big-box chain Target Corp., dropped 1.4%, trimming its gains for the year to 8.4%. The S&P 500, in comparison, was off 0.6% Thursday and is up 9.2% in 2019.
The retail sales data showed every major retail category, aside from motor vehicles and building materials, posted sales declines in December--a key month for the sector, especially for department stores and other clothing outlets. The seasonally adjusted decline of 1.2% marked the fastest drop since 2009 and compared with economists' expectations for a 0.1% increase.
"Retail sales being weak is a concern, but it shouldn't cause you to bail out of retail stocks completely," said John Buckingham, chief investment officer of the AFAM Division at Kovitz Investment Group, which manages about $5 billion in assets under management.
"The U.S. consumer has been relatively optimistic and the outlook for jobs and wage growth has improved, so those are all positives," he added.
Mr. Buckingham says he is advising clients to take advantage of the short-term fluctuations in retail stocks and add exposure to names such as Target and Walmart Inc. because of their cheap valuations, long-term growth opportunities and their durability during the latter stages of an economic expansion.
Investors will get their next snapshot of retailers' health later this month when Walmart, Home Depot Inc. and Macy's Inc., among others, open their books. A strong labor market, rising wages and lower gas prices are expected to have buoyed their results.
Walmart, which is scheduled to report quarterly results Tuesday, is expected to post a 2% increase in sales, according to FactSet, partly driven by growth in its online-grocery business . After a tough 2018, Walmart shares have rallied 5.1% to start the new year, underperforming the broader market. Investors will be watching for signs of progress in the company's cost-cutting efforts.
Home Depot, meanwhile, is among the retailers expected to post the strongest earnings and sales growth in the industry. Analysts are calling for a 29% increase in quarterly profit, along with an 11% rise in sales when the home-improvement retailer reports Feb. 26, according to FactSet. Shares of the company are up 9.7% in 2019, and investors will be interested to hear what Chief Executive Craig Menear says about the health of the housing market.
Macy's, on the other hand, spooked investors last month by cutting its outlook , saying its sales weakened in mid-December and didn't pick up until the week of Christmas. That warning followed plans by the 160-year-old retailer last fall to shrink its lower-performing stores . Its shares have fallen 15% this year after outperforming for much of 2018. Investors will be eager for updates on its store traffic when the company reports Feb. 26.
A number of other retailers have already reported solid results over the course of the earnings season. Estée Lauder Cos. turned in strong quarterly sales , driven by demand for high-end beauty products in Asia. Ralph Lauren Corp. also posted a jump in revenue on growth in Asia and Europe. Shares of the cosmetics seller and the fashion house have both rallied 19% this year.
Brian Yacktman, president and chief investment officer at YCG Investments, an independent advisory firm in Austin, Texas, said he believes Estée Lauder has the power to raise prices without much pushback from consumers because of the value of its products.
"It's a small percentage of disposable income, which means consumers will likely spend less time searching for substitutes," Mr. Yacktman said, adding his firm, which has more than $600 million in assets under management, has had a position in the company since January 2017.
Some analysts are still cautious about retail's recent rebound in a marketplace increasingly dominated by Amazon. Sears Holdings Corp. was among the latest companies to fall victim to the so-called Amazon effect, closing hundreds of locations and filing for chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in the fall.
And other economic data tied to the sector have been mixed of late. Consumer sentiment in the U.S. slid to its lowest level in more than two years in January, due in part to the partial government shutdown and economic uncertainty following gyrations across financial markets in the final months of 2018. But with the stock market rebounding this year and the Federal Reserve on a more cautious path in raising interest rates, some economists and analysts say they expect confidence to rebound, along with discretionary spending.
To receive our Markets newsletter every morning in your inbox, click here .
Write to Jessica Menton at Jessica.Menton@wsj.com
