 The long-delayed December retail sales report was incredibly weak. What will be more important is what has happened to sales since December.
The Commerce Department on Thursday reported that retail sales fell a seasonally adjusted 1.2% in December from a month earlier, marking the largest drop since 2009 . Pushed back by a month as a result of the government shutdown, the report didn't have any silver linings, with spending declines across nearly every category.
What might have been behind the malaise is a matter of speculation. The late 2018 plunge in the stock market and the worries about economic weakness that accompanied it might have soured people on spending . The government shutdown began on Dec. 22, and that could have led government and government-contract workers to tighten their belts. Even so, the report was so head-scratchingly bad that it might have been partially a matter of measurement error.
As it stands, however, it looks as if the economy headed into the new year on a weak footing, and economists spent Thursday penciling in lower estimates for gross domestic product. Morgan Stanley economists, for example, now figure GDP grew at a 3.1% rate in the fourth quarter, down from their previous forecast of 3.7%, and said that first-quarter GDP growth, which they had pegged at 1.7%, "could come in as low as 1%."
How the first quarter actually is progressing is a matter of even more guesswork than usual as a result of data delays. The January retail sales report was supposed to come out this Friday, but has been postponed to some later date. Further clouding the outlook, General Motors recently stopped providing monthly sales updates, following in the footsteps of retailers that have mostly abandoned the practice in recent years.
That said, the available evidence suggests spending has been weak so far this quarter. Analysis of Bank of America credit-card data by economists at Bank of America Merrill Lynch suggests that, excluding automobile purchases, retail sales slipped 0.3% in January from December. A Morgan Stanley retail-sales tracker also pointed to a decline January, as did an analysis of real-time sales data from UBS.
The government shutdown was in effect through much of January, while the Arctic air mass that sent temperatures plunging late in the month kept people indoors, so it makes sense that spending was weak. With the weather improving, and government workers and contractors back at work, the rough patch for spending might be over already. Considering the strength of the job market, people certainly have the means to spend.
But if the weakness in spending was only temporary, it will be a while before investors start to see the evidence. The next several weeks could be nervous ones.
Write to Justin Lahart at justin.lahart@wsj.com
