 Scope economists' forecasts, unswayed by the claims of Liberal and Labor, don't paint a promising picture, writes Shane Wright.
'The expected downturn is predominately a result of reduced asset prices.' Jakob Madsen, left
'It's better than has been the case in recent years, but not strong enough to materially change the trajectory of core inflation.' Sally Auld, JPMorgan
'The tightening we expect is modest, reflecting a number of structural headwinds.' Su-Lin Ong, left
'Chinese authorities have already loosened policy to counteract the negative drag of the tariffs.' Sarah Hunter, BIS Oxford Economics, left
'The RBA seems keen to find reasons to delay any increase.' Michael Blythe, Commonwealth Bank
'We expect growth to remain above trend ... the unemployment rate to fall further and drive wages growth.' Paul Bloxham, HSBC, right
Scott Morrison and Bill Shorten can only hope some of the nation's leading experts have got it wrong on how the Australian economy will play out this year.
The latest Scope survey for The Sydney Morning Herald and The Age suggests an economy that is going to slow, suffer from a drop in house prices and force the Reserve Bank into considering - but probably avoid - a cut in official interest rates.
In an election that will be dominated by claims and counter-claims about who are the better economic managers, our Scope economists are unlikely to be swayed one way or the other.
Instead, they worry about things either out of the control of our local MPs, such as Donald Trump's trade war with China, or about trends already well entrenched, such as the nation's tumbling house prices and stagnant wages.
The Scope economists are a little more downbeat on Australia's growth prospects than both the Federal Treasury, which has pencilled in 2.75 per cent growth for this year, and the Reserve Bank with its forecast of 3.25 per cent (which most analysts believe will be downgraded in its monetary policy statement next week).
Combined, the average forecast for growth through 2018-19 is 2.5 per cent, although there is a wide range.
The most downbeat prediction comes from Kingston University's Steve Keen, who is effectively forecasting a recession with growth at just one per cent. Another academic economist, Melbourne University's Neville Norman, is the most upbeat with a forecast of 3.1 per cent growth. But most are closer to the 2.5 per cent average.
Monash University's Jakob Madsen is one of those tipping 2.5 per cent growth this year before a step down to 1.5 per cent the year after, saying Australia's per capita income will fall while a cut in migration will also slow the economy.
"The expected downturn is predominately a result of reduced asset prices (stock and housing wealth) and that lower investment activity and consumer demand," he said.
While Madsen is expecting a further slowdown, Market Economics' Stephen Koukoulas believes there may be growth the following year.
"In 2020 we should see a more meaningful pick-up in growth, aided by easier policy, stronger business investment and a bottoming in the housing market," he noted.
The two divergent views are in part driven by very different forecasts on the actions of the Reserve Bank.
Madsen is tipping the cash rate to hold steady at 1.5 per cent through this year. Koukoulas believes the RBA will have cut the cash rate to 1 per cent by June on its way to 0.75 per cent in time for Christmas.
It's around the cash rate, and how the Reserve Bank will react to a tepid economy and near-death inflation, that so much hinges on for our Scope economists.
Most believe the RBA will hold rates steady to mid-year, but beyond that it's more akin to a coin toss. Five reckon the central bank will be increasing rates by year's end, the same number believe it will keep them at 1.5 per cent while the rest are tipping even lower rates.
Accurately forecasting rate movements over the past two years has been difficult for everyone. When the RBA took the cash rate down to 1.5 per cent in August 2016 the expectation was this would be enough to give the jobs market enough of a bump to lift inflation back into the bank's target range.
Through the past 12 months, financial markets have gone from pricing in a rate rise this year to a rate cut.
Inflation puzzle
While unemployment has fallen, it has not translated into the sort of wages growth necessary to deliver a rise in inflation. CPI data published this week for the December quarter confirmed that underlying inflation has been below the RBA's band for 15 of the past 17 quarters. A full forward with that sort of inaccuracy would struggle to get a game in the bush leagues, let alone the AFL.
Instead, a clearly frustrated RBA has stuck to the task of forecasting a lift in inflation that translates into the cash rate going up rather than coming down.
Those who believe the RBA will have lifted rates by this time next year are with the bank when it comes to inflation.
HSBC's Paul Bloxham, one of those to see a 1.75 per cent cash rate by December, is tipping inflation to have reached 2.3 per cent by June. He also sees underlying inflation at 2.1 per cent and the wage price index inching up to 2.5 per cent.
"We expect growth to remain above trend, for this to see the unemployment rate to fall further and to drive a further pick-up in wages growth," he said.
The Commonwealth Bank's Michael Blythe also believes the next move is up, but he's not overwhelmed with confidence.
He points to the way official language from the RBA has changed around its inflation target, from "2 to 3 per cent over the cycle" to "returning to the midpoint".
"The RBA seems keen to find reasons to delay any increase," he said.
The Australian Industry Group's Julie Toth says the Reserve Bank simply has too many balls in the air for a concrete prediction.
"The RBA will be wait and watch, like the rest of us," she said.
Those with a strong view the other way include Keen, who is tipping household spending alone to contract by 0.5 per cent. He expects the Reserve Bank to use its first meeting of the year next Tuesday to sit tight, but then cut rates in March.
According to Keen, the RBA will admit that "the impact of the bursting of the housing bubble - which they helped stoke - on the macroeconomy becomes obvious even to them".
RBC Capital's Su-Lin Ong notes that the longer the RBA stays at 1.5 per cent, the more uncertainty there is over its next move.
Her firm officially projects 50 basis points worth of increases over the next two years, but like a Carlton or Parramatta supporter hoping for a big season she's prepared for disappointment.
"The tightening we expect is modest, reflecting a number of structural headwinds including lower wages, inflation, elevated household debt and a likely lower level of neutral cash," she said.
While Steve Keen is tipping households to be wary, Paul Bloxham is among the most upbeat about household spending, tipping it to grow by 2.9 per cent at the end of the financial year.
The rest of the panel believes growth will be closer to 2 per cent. Again, this is lower than what Treasury is tipping with just two of the panel matching or exceeding its 2.75 per cent forecast.
The average forecast for household spending among our economists is 2.2 per cent. It's almost the same as their tip for wages growth, which came in at 2.3 per cent.
JPMorgan's Sally Auld reckons wages growth between 2.2 per cent and 2.5 per cent is on the cards.
"It's better than has been the case in recent years, but not strong enough to materially change the trajectory of core inflation," she said.
International headwinds
While the surveyed economists were focused on domestic issues, they also noted that the headwinds from overseas could be a major factor in how Australia fares over the coming year.
BIS Oxford Economics consultant Sarah Hunter said uncertainty, particularly over the direction of the Chinese economy, was the most substantial issue.
"I see this as a tail risk. The Chinese authorities have already loosened policy to counteract the negative drag of the tariffs already announced, and they've signalled that they will go further if necessary," she said.
Newcastle University economist Bill Mitchell said the UK was in a "total mess", China was realigning its growth trajectory with slower expansion on the agenda while the eurozone was facing issues from Germany to Italy. He sees the US as a possible bright spot, arguing there is scope for upside surprises.
But Stephen Koukoulas takes a glass half empty approach to the US, worried that the impact of the Trump administration's tax cuts of 2017 will wane, delivering sizeable downside risks for the world's largest economy.
That divergence in the state of the US economy is evident in the forecasts from our economists. They range between 2.3 per cent and 3.5 per cent growth, with an average of 3 per cent which is America's growth rate of the past 12 months.
Globally, the economists are also split with a low of 3 per cent and a high of 4.2 per cent. The International Monetary Fund recently downgraded its global growth forecasts to 3.5 per cent for the coming year, effectively in line with our Scope average of 3.6 per cent.
