 China's exports increased ­unexpectedly in January on the back of a surge in goods to the European Union and Southeast Asia, along with orders placed ahead of Lunar New Year.
Data from China's General Administration of Customs ­released yesterday showed that January's exports rose 9.1 per cent from a year earlier, beating a ­median forecast of economists by Bloomberg, which had predicted a 3.3 per cent decline.
It is a significant improvement on December, when exports fell by 4.4 per cent, and will offer some comfort to policymakers in ­Beijing, as the US-China trade war continues to fester.
Manufacturers have accelerated the relocation of theirproduction bases out of China, which pushed up China's exports to destinations in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (Asean), said ANZ senior economist Betty Wang.
Exports to the European Union jumped 14.5 per cent in January from a year earlier, while exports to Asean improved by 11.5 per cent.
The surge in exports to the European Union and Asean offset weakness in China's exports to the US, which fell 2.8 per cent year on year in January after a 3.5 per cent drop in December.
M.K. Tang, senior China ­economist at Goldman Sachs, however, warned that the trade data was probably distorted ­because of seasonal factors, given that Lunar New Year falls on ­different ­calendar dates each year.
This year's week-long public holiday began on February 4 compared to February 15 in 2018.
Strong January data should therefore not be a sign of strong underlying export growth ­because exporters typically front-load their shipments ahead of the holiday, Tang said.
Imports dropped 1.5 per cent from a year earlier, beating the analysts' prediction of a 10.2 per cent decline.
Imports had plunged 7.6 per cent in December, while ­January's figure shows the ­deterioration in domestic ­demand ahead of Lunar New Year. Business activity typically slows down one to two weeks ­before the holidays, as workers ­return to their ­hometowns.
China's overall trade surplus narrowed to US$39.16 billion in January from US$57.06 billion in December after economists had predicted a surplus of US$34.30 billion.
Julian Evans-Pritchard, senior China economist at Capital ­Economics, said that adjusting the trade data for seasonal ­volatility in January, China's ­exports and imports both picked up but remained weaker than a few months ago.
"Even if the latest recovery in trade is genuine, the outlook for this year is still downbeat," ­Evans-Pritchard said.
"Cooling domestic demand and easing commodity price ­inflation will remain a headwind to imports in the near-term."
Nick Marro, analyst at The Economist Intelligence Unit, said that contractionary pressures in exports in South Korea and ­Taiwan reflected headwinds in the global consumer electronics ­industry and to regional ­economic growth.
That pointed to downward pressure in Chinese shipments regardless of "what happens with the trade ­negotiations this week," Marro said.
President Xi Jinping and ­Vice-Premier Liu He are expected to meet a top US delegation that includes US trade representative Robert Lighthizer and US ­Treasury Secretary Steven ­Mnuchin, in Beijing today in hopes of reaching an agreement to end the trade war.
