 From reduced cash in the Indian economy to the uncertainties in the West, a host of issues have seen overseas investments by Indians--Reserve Bank of India (RBI) calls its outward FDI (ODI)--dip by $1 billion in 2018, even as investments in some major sectors went up.
According to data from the RBI, maintained for calendar years, ODI for 2018 stood at $11 billion, compared to $12 billion in 2017. For the same period, the "number of Indian parties investing overseas" stood at 3,641 and 3,759, respectively.
The data includes outflow in equity, loan and guarantees invoked, and, in 2016, 3,510 Indian parties had invested $13.2 billion, which means that the dip in 2017 was more than $1 billion. Companywise details of investments are not maintained. Economist Prof Charan Singh, CEO, e-GROW, who has also served at the International Monetary Fund (IMF), says: "The reasons for the dip that come to mind immediately is that the overall income level in our economy and country has dipped in the last few years, also, there are now more opportunities to invest within India."
Experts also pointed to a host of global factors, including volatile currencies and political uncertainties as reasons for retarded investments. Madan Sabnavis, chief economist, CARE Ratings, says: "Most of the ventures overseas have had mixed results. Global economy hasn't picked up, US seems slightly better, but not confident of growth being sustained. So, it looks like western economies aren't providing the same kind of options as domestic, although our economy has its own problems."
Analysis of sector-wise data shows investment in financial insurance and business services went up to $3.1 billion in 2018 from $2.5 billion in 2017. Investments in the wholesale, retail trade, restaurants and hotels went up to $1.7 billion from $1.5 billion, while money put into mining and agriculture went up to $2.1 billion from $1.2 billion.
Investments in construction jumped to $717 million from $375 million. Most other key sectors like manufacturing, storage and communication services, personal services, electricity, gas and water, and transportation have all registered a dip (see graphic).
And, despite an increase in investments in the insurance and business services sector the value hasn't touched the number in 2016. In 2016, the investments stood at $4.3 billion, fell to $2.5 billion in 2017, from where it has risen to $3.1 billion. Similar is the case in other sectors that saw an increase. Singh, while arguing that the US' policies, China's trade war and a struggling Europe coupled with the effects of Brexit have all impacted investments, said: "Also, post demonetisation, everybody's accounts are tracked and traceable, so people could be more cautious." Adding to this, Sabnavis said the fact that two biggest destinations--Europe and US---not in the best of shape has also affected companies willing to invest.
