 It was the year that housing went south. But few of the 26 economists surveyed by The Age and The Sydney Morning Herald in January 2018 predicted just how fast and low it would fall.
Only four got close in Sydney and Melbourne: Stephen Koukoulas, Steve Keen, Shane Oliver and Stephen Anthony. Between them they predicted falls of between 6 and 8 per cent in Sydney and 6 and 3.5 per cent in Melbourne. The official result would beat them all, with Sydney falling by 8.9 per cent and Melbourne 7 per cent.
Rivals Koukoulas and Keen were closest. Despite their relative similarity in predictions a year ago - with both tipping a significantly higher unemployment rate than average, and sharper falls in housing investment - the two have not shied away from barbs over the past week.
"Only a fool would give him oxygen," Koukoulas wrote of Keen on Monday after the London-based economist predicted a 95 per cent chance of recession in the next two years and a crash in Australian gross domestic product to 1 per cent.
It was some of these more outlandish predictions, including an unemployment rate of 6.5 per cent, that cost Keen the opportunity to vie for the title. Koukoulas was closer, getting the S&P/ASX 200 index almost spot on at 5750, but was not close enough on other measures. He factored in a cut in the official interest rate to 1.25 per cent by December and a 5.7 per cent unemployment rate. The economy ended the year with interest rates still frozen at 1.5 per cent and an unemployment rate of 5 per cent.
Which left Anthony as the closest to the housing market - the year's most significant economic development - and within the margin of error on other key measures. Anthony also hit close on wages, GDP, inflation, interest rates and was the only one of the economists surveyed to predict an underlying cash deficit lower than $20 billion.
The government has now whittled that down $10.1 billion and is eyeing a return to surplus this year on the back of stronger than expected company and income tax receipts.
A year later, Anthony's comments remain prescient.
"This current housing boom is easily the greatest in the history of our major capital cities - and history shows that the deepest recessions tend to follow real estate busts," he said in January 2018. "So the key risk to the domestic economy in 2018 and 2019 is depressed spending on the back of a property slump in eastern Australia combined with record household debt and rising borrowing costs."
Sluggish household spending is now at the top of the government's list of concerns after it grew by just 0.3 per cent in the last quarter thanks to households weighed down by high debt levels and falling house prices. The wages-fuelled measure is responsible for up to 60 per cent of all economic growth.
Anthony also opted to comment on an issue many hoped to avoid, the banking royal commission. His employer, Industry Super, is among those preparing to face the final recommendations when they are made public after more than a year of interrogation on Monday.
"The royal commission should help to restore public trust and build momentum to reform the financial services sector in the interest of consumers," he said. "This should all be a net positive for Australian households and small business over the medium to longer term."
Stephen Anthony is the The Age and The Sydney Morning Herald 2018 Scope forecaster of the year.
