 Strong bilateral ties with Saudi Arabia are an asset for Pakistan and the upcoming visit of Saudi crown prince will further strengthen economic and political ties between two countries, Analysts said on Thursday.
The upcoming visit of Crown Prince of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in Pakistan would be very fruitful and Pakistan's relations with Saudi Arabia are entering in a new era, analysts said while talking in a Radio current Affair Programme.
Economist Dr. Shahid Hassan Siddiqui said, Saudi Arabia is a very close friend of Pakistan and we always enjoy cordial and strong bilateral ties.
Pakistan is in dire need of investment to recover from economic crises and low current deficit, he added.
Former Ambassador Ali Sarwar Naqvi also said, Pakistan gives great significance to the bilateral ties with Kingdom of Saudi Arab and Pakistan has strong political, religious, economical and military ties with Saudi Arabia.
He said Riyadh has always supported Islamabad on international front, adds, a large number of Pakistani professional and skilled workers are working in Saudi Arab.
IR Expert Sharjah Dr. Mehdi said, the incumbent government of Pakistan is taking great initiatives to improve economy of the country.
Pakistan has great potential of business and investment, said, adding, Pakistan and Saudi Arab enjoy old and cordial bilateral ties.
He hoped, Pakistan is emerging as an important regional country and Islamabad can play a very significant role to unite the Muslim world.
Pakistan is the only nuclear Muslim state and has potential to emerge as a leader of Muslim countries. The historical visit of Saudi crown prince will improve the political and economic ties between two countries.
Economist Mirza Ikhtiyar Baig said , the Kingdom of Saudi Arab has always helped Pakistan in the times of need.
The visit of Saudi crown prince to Pakistan is a historical event and the visit conveys a strong message to the world that Pakistan has great significance for Saudi Arab and Saudi investors are willing to initiate long term projects in Pakistan.
He adds, it is diplomatic victory of Pakistan that the world is showing confidence in Pakistan's political leadership.
He appreciated that the honest leadership of Pakistan is committed to bring economic and political reforms in the country.
