 The economy's soft patch keeps looking softer.
The Federal Reserve reported January industrial-production figures, and they were strikingly weak . Overall output at the nation's factories, mines and utilities fell 0.6%. That was much worse than the 0.1% gain economists were looking for. Manufacturing production was particularly cool, falling 0.9%.
Coming a day after some very bad December retail-sales figures , the report added to the evidence the economy softened substantially heading into the new year. Estimates for first-quarter gross-domestic product have come down sharply as a result: The Federal Reserve Bank of New York's forecasting tool now points to a first-quarter growth rate of 1.1%—half what it was a week ago.
January's weakness in industrial production probably owes a lot to the cold weather that hit a swath of the country late in the month and the effects of the partial government shutdown. The sharp drop in the stock market at the end of last year, which weighed on sentiment, probably also had an effect.
Those all count as temporary problems, and since the weather has warmed, the government has opened and the stock market has recovered, there is reason to expect a rebound. Indeed, a New York Fed survey also released Friday showed sentiment among New York state manufacturers had picked up this month.
But other, less-temporary things could be weighing on manufacturers. The boost from last year's tax cuts and fiscal stimulus is fading, and weakness overseas could be cutting into demand. Increased tariffs also could be having an impact, as well as the lagged effects of the Fed's rate increases last year.
The distinction highlights a problem forecasters are facing: It is hard to know how much of the economy's recent spate of weakness should be ascribed to temporary causes and how much comes from longer-lasting factors.
Most economists would say the soft spell is probably fleeting but, as when a doctor tells a patient "it's probably nothing," it is hard not to be a little nervous.
Write to Justin Lahart at justin.lahart@wsj.com
