 Shoppers embarked on a major spending spree last month, splashing out on clothes and making the most of post-Christmas discounts.
Rising wages, record employment and slower price inflation mean household budgets can go further in the shops.
Combined with the new year sales, this led to a sharp rise in spending, raising hopes that consumers will provide some backbone to the economy after the weak growth recorded at the end of 2018.
Retail sales volumes in January climbed 4.2pc compared with the same month in 2017, the Office for National Statistics said.
This was the biggest rise since late 2016. Economists had only expected a rise of 3.4pc, indicating that shoppers were more enthusiastic than anticipated.
Clothes sales jumped by 5.5pc, a sharp turnaround for what has been a troubled section of the high street.
Grocers breathed a sigh of relief as food sales climbed 3.2pc on the year, up from disappointing growth of less than 1pc in the run-up to Christmas.
Non-store retailing - predominantly online shopping - also increased by 14.3pc. The internet accounted for close to one-fifth of all purchases in the month.
Sales also improved from a weak December with volumes up 1pc on the month, beating expectations of a modest 0.2pc improvement.
“In contrast to the Brexit pessimism, which seems to be weighing on other sectors, the rise in retail sales volumes in January implies that consumers are still willing to spend,” said Thomas Pugh at Capital Economics.
“If a ‘no deal’ Brexit is avoided, consumers should be in a good position to ramp up spending in the second half of the year."
This does not mean hard-pressed retailers are in the clear yet, however.
“What these numbers don’t tell us is the impact heavy discounting will have had on margin, and ultimately profit,” said Ian Gilmartin at Barclays Corporate Banking.
“Total sales are just one half of the story and while slowing price rises reflect the lower inflation reported in the wider economy earlier this week, generous price cuts aren’t sustainable in the long-term so it remains to be seen how the industry will perform now that the Christmas chaos is behind us.
"That shouldn’t detract from today’s result, but there will certainly be no complacency in retail boardrooms this morning.”
1,300 retail store closures and counting: tracking the high street's miserable start to 2018
Economists still believe the underlying economic backdrop, with weak business investment ahead of Brexit, a slowing eurozone economy and increasing signs of a global wobble, mean the Bank of England will hold off raising interest rates regardless of higher consumer spending.
“With such a weak reading on monthly GDP in December it’s difficult to see how overall GDP can be that positive in the first quarter,” said George Buckley at Nomura.
“With slowing economic growth over the coming quarters and a near-term weaker global growth outlook, a move in rates by the Bank of England anytime soon seems unlikely. This is why we have put back our view of the next hike from the Monetary Policy Committee to November.”
