 It's official. Britain's shoppers cannot help themselves when confronted with an eye-catching discount. At least that was the message from yesterday's retail sales figures, as cheap post-Christmas deals drew the nation's consumers back to the shops. After a disappointing December, retail sales volumes increased by 1 per cent last month, far more than the 0.2 per cent forecast by economists. For the year to January, they grew by 4.2 per cent, the best annual rate since December 2016, the Office for National Statistics said. January's performance will give hope to the struggling industry after what the British Retail Consortium described as the worst Christmas in a decade, when high street chains such as Debenhams and Marks & Spencer suffered a dip in sales. Overall, December retail sales shrank by 0.7 per cent, the ONS said. Clothing sales grew strongly last month thanks to the biggest cuts in annual terms since August 2016, the ONS said. Food sales also rose after a slight dip over Christmas. "January sales were much stronger than our forecast. Following a sharp decline in December, households stepped up to take advantage of the continued promotion season," Sreekala Kochugovindan, an economist at Barclays, said. Strong retail sales stood out against a series of gloomy economic releases this week. GDP growth last year was only 1.4 per cent, the joint-weakest figure since 2009, and inflation dipped below 2 per cent in a further sign that the economy may be weakening. Forecast-beating retail sales were particularly welcome because they provide an insight into household confidence. As consumption accounts for two thirds of national output, a dip in confidence can harm growth. This week, Gertjan Vlieghe, 48, a Bank of England ratesetter, noted that household spending had held up in the face of weaker income growth since the referendum in June 2016. To maintain spending, households had saved less, a position that Mr Vlieghe warned was not sustainable in the long term. Economists said that strong retail sales may not last. James Smith, of ING, said: "It's worth remembering that January is a month where a huge chunk of unwanted Christmas gifts get returned, while consumers go out and spend their newly acquired gift cards." CREDIT: Philip Aldrick Economics Editor
