 Singapore
After taking into account selection bias, the study by the Ministry of Trade and Industry (MTI) and SkillsFuture Singapore (SSG) found that the real wages of workers who went for WSQ training were 0.8 per cent higher on average than their counterparts in a control group.
Trainees who are in the course of attaining WSQ full qualifications experienced a real wage premium of 5.8 per cent on average in the year following the training.
Unemployed individuals who attended a WSQ training module were 3.5 percentage points more likely than those in the control group to be employed in the year after training.
Similarly, non-employed trainees working towards a WSQ full qualification (comprising a series of training modules) were 2.6 percentage points more likely than the control group to have found jobs a year after.
The WSQ is a national credential system that trains, develops, assesses and certifies skills for the Singapore workforce, in support of the SkillsFuture movement.
The study drew on SSG data on trainees who received a statement of attainment (SOA) upon completing a WSQ training module, and those who earned a full qualification between 2011 and 2016.
Based on the results, some 6,100 SOA trainees and 400 full-qualification trainees between 2011 and 2014 were estimated to have moved from non-employment to employment as a result of the WSQ training.
MTI economists Marsha Teo and Wen Jia Ying, the authors of the report, said the positive findings on wages are comparable to the findings of the longitudinal study by the then-Workforce Development Agency in 2013 for earlier WSQ cohorts.
"These studies provide strong evidence that individuals have benefited from WSQ training aimed at upgrading their skills and enhancing their employability," they wrote.
The MTI economists and SSG said SSG will continue supporting individuals through WSQ and other training programmes.
They added: "Singaporeans are, in turn, encouraged to participate in training in order to build up their capabilities so they can enhance their employability and benefit from higher wages over the longer term."
