 Singapore
THE Singapore economy slowed last year - and will likely only cool further, according to the latest news from the Ministry of Trade and Industry (MTI).
With an economic slowdown expected to drag on, all eyes will be on relief measures in next Monday's Budget, and the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) policy meeting in April is also keenly awaited.
Gross domestic product (GDP) was up by 3.2 per cent to S$487.1 billion, after notching revised growth of 3.9 per cent in 2017, the MTI has said. But the ministry also warned that growth this year could be "slightly below the mid-point" in its forecast range of 1.5 per cent to 3.5 per cent.
Loh Khum Yean, permanent secretary for trade and industry, said that global uncertainties and downside risks have increased in the past three months, while the external demand outlook has also softened. The chance that Britain will crash out of the European Union next month sans "deal" has spooked planners wary of the impact of investor and consumer sentiment. And risks from the United States' trade-related sabre-rattling and a sharper-than-expected slowdown in China are still on the horizon.
United Overseas Bank economist Barnabas Gan also said that the view is for China's trade outlook to stay fragile "suggesting further negative spillover to Singapore's trade and manufacturing clusters".
The latest full-year growth figure - shy of the 3.3 per cent estimate previously mentioned by Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong - came as fourth-quarter GDP missed its mark, too. The economy was up by just 1.9 per cent year on year in the final three months of 2018, well under an official flash estimate of 2.2 per cent.
Sector by sector, growth in both manufacturing and services came in slower last year, although the construction industry appears to have bottomed out.
The manufacturing sector expanded by 7.2 per cent in 2018, against 10.4 per cent growth a year ago. Growth was primarily supported by electronics, transport engineering and biomedical manufacturing .
The services sector grew by 3 per cent last year, easing from 3.2 per cent in 2017. This was on the back of expansion in the finance and insurance, business services and wholesale and retail trade industries.
Meanwhile, construction still contracted. But the shrinkage of 3.4 per cent last year was slower than the 10.2 per cent decline seen in 2017. The output of the sector was weighed down by a decline in public construction works, even as private-sector projects rose marginally.
Mr Loh said a turnaround is likely on a pickup in contract awards since mid-2017, and pointed to the Building and Construction Authority's forecast of higher nominal construction output in 2019.
The MTI expects manufacturing growth to keep easing, with a "significant moderation" after two years of robust expansion. Electronics and precision engineering will likely face external headwinds, on weaker cyclical demand for semiconductors.
MTI economics director Yong Yik Wei said: "We can expect some moderation coming off the high base. . . But there are also still pockets of growth." Medical technology and aerospace manufacturing, for instance, "are expected to do quite well".
Growth in outward-facing services sectors, such as wholesale trade, transportation and storage, and finance and insurance, is also expected to cool, in line with a slowdown in key economies elsewhere.
But information and communications could hold steady on demand for digital solutions, while education, health and social services may be supported by a ramp-up of healthcare facilities operations.
Here at home, the labour market is still "very supportive", said MAS chief economist Edward Robinson, and private consumption, which grew by 2.4 per cent last year, "is expected to maintain a steady pace of growth". Mr Robinson reiterated the central bank's core inflation forecast of between 1.5 per cent and 2.5 per cent.
Maybank Kim Eng economists Chua Hak Bin and Lee Ju Ye wrote that "inflation pressures will likely ease in 2019 on the back of slower growth and tighter credit conditions". They, alongside counterparts at Standard Chartered, think the MAS will leave monetary policy untouched in April after two tightening moves last year.
But other analysts, like Citi's Kit Wei Zheng and Ang Kai Wei, expect more tightening, "though our conviction is less strong than in October" last year.
Barclays regional economist Brian Tan walked the middle road, saying: "Our base case remains for the MAS to leave policy unchanged. . . due to the subdued economic growth outlook. However, based on the inflation outlook, we think it is still too early to rule out further tightening."
