 Singapore
And the costs could keep going up this year, researchers from the Ministry of Trade and Industry (MTI) economics division have now said.
The trend was felt in services industries - rather than in manufacturing - as productivity was higher in Singapore's external-facing sectors, according to official reports on Friday.
Overall unit labour costs here inched up by 0.4 per cent last year, lifted by a 1.7 per cent rise in services, despite a 3.5 per cent drop in factories' manpower expenses. This tracked a broad pattern over the past five years: Businesses' unit labour cost rose by 1.5 per cent a year on average from 2013 to 2018, with manufacturing the only sector to see a decline, to the tune of 1.9 per cent.
Overall unit labour cost is likely to keep facing upward pressure in 2019, said MTI economist Geraldine Lim.
"This is because wage growth is expected to remain firm on the back of stable labour market conditions, while productivity growth could ease in tandem with the expected slowdown in economic growth."
Policymakers still seem to have faith in the labour market.
Monetary Authority of Singapore chief economist Edward Robinson said at a briefing in the morning: "The labour market continues to be very supportive since a few years back of private consumption and so forth."
Still, Terence Ho, divisional director for manpower planning and policy at the Manpower Ministry, added that his team is keeping an eye on the impact of economic conditions.
Productivity growth tapered off over the course of 2018 as the economy cooled, MTI estimates showed.
Real value-added per actual hour worked was up by 3.7 per cent year on year, against 4.9 per cent in 2017.
The MTI economists noted in their report that the growth "was primarily driven by outward-oriented sectors", with the domestic front dragged down by retail trade and other services.
Manufacturing clocked the biggest productivity gains, at 9.8 per cent, while accommodation services was up by 6.3 per cent and finance and insurance grew by 4.2 per cent.
But Trade and Industry Permanent Secretary Loh Khum Yean told the briefing: "We should really be looking at the longer-term trends, especially for a small, open economy like Singapore, where productivity is highly pro-cyclical... And on that point, I think the growth that we've seen in the last two years is encouraging."
When all overheads were counted, unit business cost fell by 6 per cent in manufacturing last year, but rose by 1.8 per cent in services. Services data covered the first nine months of 2018.
Business costs this year are expected to be pushed up by both wage growth and higher office rents, although utilities costs - a key contributor in manufacturing expenses - could go down as oil prices drop.
