 Australia's top economists say the nation's property market will fall further, raising concerns about the potential damage to the economy.
As CoreLogic reported house values tumbling at their fastest rate since the Global Financial Crisis, the latest Scope survey for the Herald reveals growing concern about how households will react to those falling prices. Across the 18 economists surveyed, the average predicted fall in Sydney prices this financial year is 7.6 per cent, while for Melbourne it is 7.2 per cent.
Their forecasts, provided last month, may yet prove optimistic, with CoreLogic's measure of housing values released yesterday showing a 1.4 per cent fall in Sydney through January and a 1.7 per cent fall in Melbourne.
Sydney house values dropped by 10.9per cent last year. Dwelling values are now down 12.3 per cent since their high in mid-2017, the biggest fall in the nation's largest property market since the 1982 recession.
In Melbourne, house values dropped 10.6 per cent through the year.
The rate at which values are falling has accelerated in the past three months while the number of homes on the market has soared.
Among the Scope panel, Industry Super's top economist Stephen Anthony is the most pessimistic on property, predicting a 14.5 per cent drop in Sydney prices this financial year and a 9.7 per cent drop in Melbourne.
He believes a significant wealth effect that will ripple through the nation's two largest cities that will be exacerbated by global economic headwinds.
"We are likely to see household consumption fall to or below 2 per cent growth rates per year unless households are somehow able to take on even more debt," he said. "That seems unlikely given current bank lending practices."
AMP Capital chief economist Shane Oliver, who tips a 10 per cent fall this financial year in Sydney and Melbourne, said the overall economy could be hit as people moved to offload properties before prices fell even further.
"Over the last 12 months we have come to expect even deeper falls in house prices with the tightening in credit conditions and a shift from "fear of missing out" or FOMO towards a "fear of not getting out" or FONGO by some property market participants being major drivers," he said.
Just one Scope panel economist, the University of Melbourne's Neville Norman, tipped house prices to rise in Sydney and Melbourne across the 2018-19 financial year. He forecast a 2.5per cent gain in Sydney and a 1.5 per cent lift in Melbourne.
Reserve Bank figures this week showed housing credit grew at less than 0.3 per cent in December, the poorest monthly performance since 1984.
Australian Industry Group economist Julie Toth said the immediate threat posed by falling prices is a drop in confidence and a reluctance by households to spend. She said a slowdown in residential construction would flow through the economy by fewer well-paying jobs with a visible sign likely to be evident around major cities. "We could see large empty eyesore sites stay vacant for lengthy periods ahead," she noted.
One concern connected to housing prices is the fall out from the banking royal commission with Kenneth Hayne's report to be released on Monday.
