 VENEZUELAN President Nicolas Maduro is under increasing pressure at home and abroad to stand down - but does the sidelined leader face an uprising from the country’s population?
The United States said it has ramped up pressure on Mr Maduro by sanctioning senior officials and delivering 200 tonnes of aid to the Colombian border. The US-delivered aid is expected to reach the Colombian border on Saturday, an unnamed US official told Reuters. US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo told reporters in Reykjavik, Iceland, on Friday Mr Maduro was beginning to realise Venezuelans no longer support him as their leader.
Related articles VENEZUELA CRISIS: Cuba claims US deploying SPECIAL FORCES as part o... Russia accuses the US of targeting military in Venezuela
His words came amid reports the socialist dictator has been holding secret talks with the Trump administration, something not denied by US officials.
A senior administration official in Washington who was not authorized to speak publicly said U.S. officials were willing to meet with “former Venezuela officials, including Maduro himself, to discuss their exit plans.”
The latest developments come days after tens of thousands of demonstrators marched again Mr Maduro in towns and cities across Venezuela.
They are supporting opposition leader Juan Guadio who declared himself interim president last month.
READ MORE: VENEZUELA CRISIS: FURY AS THOUSANDS DEMAND CHANGE FROM PRESIDENT - ‘ENOUGH IS ENOUGH!’
Venezuela latest: Nicolas Maduro is under pressure to stand down from power
Will Maduro face an uprising from the people?
Fernando Freijedo, analyst at The Economist Intelligence Unit, said the mass protests on Tuesday would have little effect on Mr Maduro’s power.
He told Express.co.uk: “They do not change the status quo other than show that Mr Guaidó and the opposition retain momentum and popular support.”
Mr Maduro importantly retains the support of the Venezuelan military, plus Russia and China internationally.
READ MORE: VENEZUELA GOLD: PRESIDENT NICHOLAS MADURO ACCUSES BANK OF ENGLAND OF ROBBERY
Related articles Venezuela CRISIS: Maduro vows to increase gold extraction Venezuela CRISIS: Bitcoin trading SOARS to highest EVER in Venezuel...
Venezuela latest: Tens of thousands of people rally against Mr Maduro in Caracas
Mr Freijedo said he did “not expect” there to be a popular uprising but he acknowledged Mr Mauduro’s power was fading fast.
He said: “While we acknowledge significant risks to this baseline, our baseline is that regime pragmatists will turn on Mr Maduro and form a transition government with Mr Guaidó.
“A core tenant of this forecast is the expectation that regime members prefer to share control of a recovering country than not share control a ruined one."
READ MORE: VENEZUELA CRISIS: MADURO DIGS HEELS IN AS HE LAUNCHES ‘LARGEST EVER MILITARY DRILLS’
Venezuela latest: Juan Guaido is cheered on by his supporters
Venezuelans are demanding Mr Maduro stands down after years of hyperinflation have left the once rich Latin America impoverished.
Millions of people have already fled the border to seek a better life as a food and medicine shortage cause a major crisis.
Maduro was re-elected in 2018 but the result was widely regarded as a sham.
Mr Guaido's self-proclamation as interim leader is backed by the US and 20 European nations, including the UK.
