 A SOFT BREXIT should have been off the table from the start, as acknowledging early on that Britain would have not been part of the customs union and single market would have allowed the UK to make major preparations and strengthened its hand during the negotiations with the EU, two leading economists claim in their book.
Labour’s official position is to secure a Brexit where the UK stays in the customs union and maintains a ‘close relationship’ with the single market. Last week, Jeremy Corbyn wrote a letter to Theresa Mays setting out his party's aim and the Prime Minister responded, countering his points. Mrs May ruled out any form of EU customs union memberships.
Related articles Inside Politics: MPs punished for Brexit mess Jean Claude-Junker BOMBSHELL: How EU chief admitted to being a ‘LIAR'
However, on Thursday, Brussels sources revealed that the Prime Minister backed down in her bid to secure substantial changes to the Irish backstop.
Critics in Westminster fear the EU could hold Britain hostage in a permanent customs union if the backstop is ever triggered.
During her meeting with Donald Tusk, the European Council president, Mrs May highlighted the importance of securing the support of Labour MPs because at least 30 from her own party will reject whatever deal she brings back to the Commons.
The Prime Minister’s effort to secure a time-limit on the backstop, a unilateral exit mechanism or its replacement with “alternative arrangements” were met with frustration.
A Soft Brexit should have been off the table from the start, according to two economists
Labour’s official position is to secure a Brexit where the UK stays in the customs union
Mr Tusk and Jean-Claude Juncker, the European Commission president, both warned her that the EU will not reopen the withdrawal agreement.
In 2018 book, "Clean Brexit: Why Leaving the EU still makes sense", authors and economists Liam Halligan and Gerard Lyons suggested that if the UK had made crystal clear from the start that it would have not been part of the single market or customs union completely, its hand during the negotiations would have been stronger.
They wrote: “One of the main advantages of a Clean Brexit - keeping membership of the single market and customs union membership completely o the table - is that the outline of the UK’s broad relationship with the EU and the rest of the world should be clear for some time ahead of March 2019.
“This allows the UK to make major preparations, such as expanding our customs clearance facilities to include UK-EU trade and preparing to re-impose cross-Channel immigration controls.”
According to two economists, the UK's hand during negotiations could have been stronger
"But a strictly time-limited Temporary Transition Agreement for Britain may still be needed given that many of the details of these negotiations are unlikely to emerge until the last moment.
"Acknowledging that [a Clean Brexit] early on will not only reassure businesses heavily impacted by Brexit, and help prepare public opinion, but will also strengthen the UK’s bargaining hand during the Article 50 talks."
