 The threat of a sharper than ­expected economic slowdown in China could damage Asia's growth prospects, according to analysts.
While optimism is rising over continuing trade talks between the United States and China, they have yet to reach a deal and ­remain far apart on key structural issues. If the conflict were to ­intensify, China's challenge would be to cushion its economy from a fall.
China's latest data on foreign trade, gross domestic product growth and the purchasing managers' index suggest the economy will continue to slow, at least for the next month or so, meaning a hard landing is not ­anticipated for now.
A sudden shock to the ­economy would add to challenges from increasing protectionist ­tensions in the Asia-Pacific, a ­region which is highly dependent on global demand.
As companies and manufacturers shift supply chains to lower cost countries, that may make the markets most reliant on Chinese demand more sensitive to a ­slowing Chinese economy.
"We will have a slowdown in Asia-Pacific growth in the first quarter because of trade ­uncertainties between the US and China. Most companies do not ­invest when they worry about the future and they delay ­investment," said Mahamoud ­Islam, Asia-Pacific senior ­economist at Euler Hermes. "The fact that they are delaying ­investment is impacting demand for goods and global trade."
China accounts for about a third of global growth and about two-thirds of Asia-Pacific growth, Islam said.
If US-China tensions were to rise, small open Asian economies reliant on trade would be more vulnerable. This would include Hong Kong, South Korea, ­Singapore and Taiwan, especially in the electronics and semiconductor sectors, Islam said.
Larger economies such as ­India were more resilient and less reliant on trade, which provided stronger domestic bases for growth, he said.
Hints of such outcomes were evident in this week's economic figures.
Data from Singapore's trade ministry on Friday showed the city state's economy grew by 1.9 per cent year on year in the fourth quarter, down from the 2.4 per cent in the previous three months.
"A sharper than expected slowdown of the Chinese ­economy could adversely affect the region's growth due to falling import demand from China, especially given regional ­economies' close interlinkages with China through their participation in manufacturing and trade-related services value chains," the ministry said.
"Against this backdrop, the pace of growth in the Singapore economy is expected to slow in 2019."
In Japan, a preliminary ­estimate showed this week that the economy grew 0.3 per cent in the fourth quarter, compared to an upwardly revised 0.7 per cent contraction in the third quarter. But GDP external demand fell 0.3 per cent compared to an 0.1 per cent decline in the previous ­period.
Bank of America Merrill Lynch Japan economist Izumi Devalier said export momentum ­remained weak in the fourth quarter as a slowing Chinese economy and weakening ­semiconductor demand hit ­shipments.
