 ECONOMISTS have warned of a tough Budget on Wednesday with Finance Minister Tito Mboweni likely to bailout state-owned entities such as Eskom, and increase taxes. The government is sitting with a deficit of 4.3%, a spiralling debt of close to 60% of the gross domestic product and guarantees of R670 billion to SOEs.
Last year, National Treasury identified SOEs including Eskom, Denel, SAA and the SA National Roads Agency Limited as a risk to the economy.
President Cyril Ramaphosa warned that a call on the debt on any of the SOEs by commercial banks will trigger a cross-default in the state and the government will not have cash to pay back the loans immediately.
Eskom has a debt of R419bn, SAA requires R21.7bn to stay afloat in the next two years, and the SABC needs a bailout of R3bn. The SABC has, in the past three years, been crying out for a bailout and Treasury has demanded more details on it. The SABC said recently it needed R3bn to be able to stabilise financially. In 2009, the SABC received a bailout of R1.5bn after it faced a similar financial crisis.
SAA was this week slammed with a court judgment of R1bn to pay Comair for anti-competitive behaviour, after a 14-year legal battle. The national airline has received more than R20bn in bailouts in the past few years, and has incurred financial losses of more than R20bn in the past six years.
Eskom's woes are far from over as it also expects a financial loss of R20bn at the end of March. This is likely to be followed by more financial losses.
Eskom's coal-fired power plants of Medupi and Kusile are behind schedule and costs for their construction increased substantially.
Medupi's initial cost 10 years ago was R69bn but that has gone up to more than R200bn; Kusile's costs escalated from R70bn to more than R230bn for the same period.
The government is also struggling with an increasing wage bill, which was now above R587bn. The public sector wage bill has increased substantially in the past few years despite the National Treasury saying it was trying to trim it.
Dawie Roodt, a chief economist at Efficient Group, and Mike Schussler of Economists.co.za, said Eskom was going to be a key announcement in the budget.
Roodt said the major thing is how much Mboweni is going to give Eskom.
It has been reported Eskom proposed a debt swap of R100bn.
Ramaphosa also said in the State of the Nation Address, Mboweni would deal with the Eskom issue. This comes after the president announced that Eskom would be split into three entities for generation, distribution and transmission.
Roodt said he believed Mboweni will give Eskom more than R100bn.
The chief economist said the other issue is cutting state spending in the budget. Since the time of Pravin Gordhan as Finance Minister, the government has cut state spending and perks for senior officials and politicians.
Roodt said the other key thing was whether in the next financial year there would be an increase in taxes, where and by how much.
Treasury increased VAT for the first time in 25 years last year by 1%, to plug the hole from the R50bn that was under-collected by the revenue agency.
Schussler also said there would be tax increases. There will be no relief for taxpayers as there will be increases in fuel levy and sin taxes, he said.
The other question is how much the deficit will be, said Schussler.
However, Eskom will remain a big part of what is going to be announced by Mboweni.
"Eskom is going to be more than a debt swap. The question will be how do we split Eskom, and how do we collect debt from municipalities? We know the World Bank study has said the situation in South Africa is not good," said Schussler.
"The big thing is how he is going to address Eskom in financial terms. We are going to see a lot of announcements on Eskom. The major thing is what do we do with Eskom, SAA and other SOEs.
"On the spending side, social grants will get an increase of around 4%."
There will be an increase in infrastructure spending. The government announced more than R800bn in infrastructure in the next three years.
The other key part is how government will deal with the escalating public sector wage bill. The wage bill has ballooned to R587bn and has been increasing over the past 10 years.
The question of higher education and municipal funding are also going to be raised in the Budget. The government has pumped more than R30.8bn to fund fee free higher education, and municipalities have been complaining that the 9% in equitable share was very little.
They want more money from the Treasury, but some municipalities are in serious financial trouble and cannot generate their own revenue.
