 Furious Brexiteers say plan is 'ProjectFear blackmail' 'PATRONISING' EU WILL AID TO THE UK IF THERE SEND FOOD IS NO DEAL EXCLUSIVE
THE EU is planning to send food aid to feed Britain's poor in the event of a no deal Brexit, sources in Brussels have revealed.
The bizarre European Commission plan involves sending food parcels to British food banks for the needy from the EU's wine lakes and food mountains of surpluses produced by the protective measures in the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP).
Conservative Brexiteers last night branded the proposal "the last throw of the dice of Project Fear by EU blackmailers" hoping to scare Britons into changing their minds and remaining.
There was also a warning that it indicates that the EU might try to illegally block food being sold to Britain if it leaves without a formal deal.
The revelation came as a major new report by leading economists has attacked the "misleading" UK Treasury economic models which are at the heart of many of the Project Fear claims.
Meanwhile, tourism chiefs pointed out the potential benefits of Brexit and said that the end of EU rules could provide the industry with a massive boost. The revelation about food parcels from the EU emerged at an event in Brussels last week where EU bureaucrats working for the Commission's international development department were present.
They revealed that their plans for a no deal Brexit including "providing humanitarian aid to the UK". According to a source, officials said in the event there were food shortages in Britain they would send supplies from CAP surpluses to supply British food banks. The Commission has declined to comment on the report but has not denied the plans were being put in place when contacted by the Sunday Express.
The revelation was greeted with astonishment by Brexiteer Tory MPs.
Wellingborough MP Peter Bone said: "This story underlines exactly why we want to leave the EU. What an incredibly patronising attitude from Brussels. "Obviously, we won't need their food and this is more Project Fear nonsense but it also shows how much waste there is with the Common Agricultural Policy which is one of the many reasons people in Britain want to leave."
North West Leicestershire MP Andrew Bridgen said: "This really is the last throw of the Project Fear dice from the EU blackmailers.
"The only way there will be a food shortage in Britain is if the EU puts up illegal non-tariff barriers to stop food coming in. This, of course, would break World Trade Organisation rules so would be contrary to international law.
"It is clear the EU elite and their Remainer allies are convinced the British people can still be intimidated and bullied into changing their minds with threats like this, but they are wrong." Morley and Outwood MP Andrea Jenkyns pointed out that the eurozone is heading for a recession with three major economies already in recession.
She said: "The way the EU is going they will need that food aid to for people in their own countries who are already struggling to get jobs."
The EU is under pressure to ensure that food continues to come into the UK after Brexit day on March 29.
Brexit could trigger a farming crisis in the EU if it becomes harder to export food and drink to the UK. There are fears in France that if Britain leaves without a deal its farming sector will be plunged into turmoil as it struggles with overproduction and falling prices.
France has an estimated annual trade surplus with the UK of 800 million euros for dairy products and 200 million euros for fruit. France's wine and spirits sector had a surplus of more than 1 billion euros, and there are also concerns that apple producers will suffer if it become harder to sell into their biggest market.
French cattle farmers are reportedly worried that Irish beef will be sent to the EU after Brexit, putting further pressure on profits.
Meanwhile, a report by the Brexiteer group Economists for Free Trade has attacked the "deceitful" economic modelling used by the Treasury which lies behind many of the projections about how Britain will suffer after Brexit.
The report attacks the Treasury and Bank's assumptions that there will be: no gains from free trade, a border war with the EU and the UK would be disadvantaged by tariffs more than the EU. Economists for Free Trade chairman Professor Patrick Minford said: "My message to Brits is: unlike these selfstyled experts, you got this issue right. "Yes, you were right to ask for your democracy back, and yes, this is also good for the British economy, contrary to all that Project Fear."
Tourism bosses have also said that Brexit is an opportunity to slash the cost of flights within the UK and VAT for the industry which the Government can do once it is free of EU rules. Scrapping Air Passenger Duty (APD) for internal flights would knock £26 off the cost of a return journey.
It is hoped that if APD is scrapped the cost of mini-breaks within the UK would tumble and new routes would become viable. This comes as the industry works to persuade tourists who come to London to also visit other parts of the UK. Tim Alderslade, chief executive of Airlines UK, which represents firms including easyJet and British Airways, said: "This 'double taxation' anomaly puts the UK at a genuine disadvantage compared to our European rivals.
"Removing the tax for domestic travel would lead to more routes."
Kurt Janson at Tourism Alliance said this was a chance to "rebuild the UK's domestic aviation network". He said: "When the UK's left the EU, we will be able to address the anomaly in EU rules which requires the Government to impose double the amount of APD on domestic flights than it applies to flights to any other European destination."
Ryanair is pushing for APD to be scrapped entirely. Under the present rules, long haul flights are hit with a £78 levy. Support also came from senior Conservative MP Sir Graham Brady.
He said: "APD is a regressive tax which is bad for business and adds to the cost for families taking a break."
OPINION: PAGE 14
'This really is the last throw of the Project Fear dice from the EU blackmailers'
