 BRITAIN should have stood up to Brussels during the Brexit negotiations as, despite widespread negativity, Theresa May had a rather “strong hand” to play against the bloc, two leading economists claimed in their acclaimed book.
Last week, Brussels sources revealed that Theresa May backed down in her bid to secure substantial changes to the Irish backstop after private talks with EU bosses. The Prime Minister conceded that her previous promise to MPs that she would seek to “reopen” her withdrawal agreement and deliver “significant and legally-binding” changes is unachievable. The move is likely to infuriate hardline Conservative Brexiteers after the Government backed the Brady amendment that called for the backstop to be scrapped and replaced with “alternative arrangements to avoid a hard border” in Ireland.
Related articles BREXIT DILEMMA: MPs will vote for Brexit deal ONLY if May steps down Marr issues BRUTAL swipe at McDonnell over Labour's Brexit strategy
Critics in Westminster are concerned the EU could "hold Britain hostage" in a timeless customs union if the backstop is ever triggered.
It is not the first time Mrs May has received condemnation for “giving in to Brussels” from Conservative Brexiteers, though.
After the EU approved her Withdrawal Agreement last November, Mrs May came under fire from MPs within her own party, with former Brexit secretary Dominic Raab suggesting she had failed to stand up to a bullying European Union.
In 2018 book, "Clean Brexit: Why Leaving the EU still makes sense", authors and economists Liam Halligan and Gerard Lyons explain the reasons why the UK should have indeed stood up to a "bully superstate" during the negotiations.
The two authors argue that Britain has a rather “strong hand” to play against the EU, as it is in the interests of all the country members to strike a good deal.
BRITAIN should have stood up to Brussels during the Brexit negotiations, two economists have claimed
Theresa May reportedly backed down in her bid to secure substantial changes to the Irish backstop
Mr Lyons and Mr Halligan wrote: "The latest figures show that £384billion of trade in goods took place between the UK and EU in 2016, with Britain chalking up a trade deficit of £96billion.
“Germany, Spain, Belgium and Luxembourg, the Netherlands, France, Poland, Italy, Sweden, Denmark, Portugal and Finland will all be keen that low, or even zero-tariff cross-Channel trade continues once Britain leaves the EU, seeing as they all sell considerably more to the UK than we sell to them.
“The annual German goods surplus with the UK was some £32billion in 2016, based on heavy sales of cars, machinery and pharmaceuticals, totalling £65billion of German goods exports.
“Powerful business interests have much to lose if the UK imposes tariffs on such exports.”
The authors claimed that France is sometimes portrayed as a country wants to "punish" the UK for leaving the EU, as President Emmanuel Macron previously described Brexit as a "crime" and a "tragedy", "vowing to take an uncompromising approach to deter other member states from ‘killing the European idea’".
President Emmanuel Macron previously described Brexit as a ‘crime’ and a ‘tragedy’
However, they noted: “Yet numerous French firms and even the French government itself have strong commercial interests in the UK, with investments across sectors including transport, automotive manufacturing and nuclear power."
Mr Lyons and Mr Halligan also looked at one of the most important sectors under discussion in the negotiations, which is the UK car industry.
They wrote: "Britain produces around 1.8 million cars annually, 1.2 million of those for export.
“The auto sector is, after agriculture, the most protected within the EU, with a 9.6 per cent tariff on cars exported from non-EU countries.
“Yet the case for a post-Brexit auto-sector trade agreement is strong, given the flow of car exports between the UK and EU - and the extent to which EU-based companies are themselves owners of UK-based car plants."
Crédito: By Martina Bet
