 It is less than 40 days till Brexit. The possibility that this will happen with no deal in place governing future trade relations between Britain and the European Union is alarmingly high. Hence the Treasury is working at pace to devise a tariff programme in the event of a no-deal denouement. To some pro-Brexit politicians, this is not so much an economic risk as an opportunity. They believe that by eliminating import tariffs altogether, Britain outside the EU could simultaneously improve British consumers' living standards and act as a beacon for global free trade. It is a seductive argument, based on a valid economic insight, and it is disastrously wrong. Such purism will damage British industry, especially farming and manufacturing. The costs of leaving the EU without a deep and wide free trade deal will be immense. Liam Fox, the international trade secretary, has said that he wants zero tariffs in as many areas as possible to be among options considered by the government. Other ministers, including Michael Gove, the environment secretary, want assurances of protection for agriculture and other sectors. Against the siren calls of pro-Brexit fundamentalists, even this will be inadequate. Britain needs to align its import duties with those of the EU, pending a formal trade agreement. As a member of the EU, Britain maintains its common external tariff on imports from non-EU countries. If Britain exits without a deal, it will default to the rules of the World Trade Organisation (WTO). It would be able to eliminate tariffs on imports provided it did so for all WTO members and not just some of them. That is the course urged by a small number of economists who favour Brexit and who advance their case through a group called Economists for Free Trade. Their case rests on the principle that import barriers — through tariffs, quotas or subsidies — increase costs to consumers and shelter inefficient industries. This is true. Almost all economists believe that cross-border free trade raises real incomes in both countries, by enabling them to specialise in what they produce. In addition, imports increase the competitive pressures on domestic firms to improve the pricing and quality of their goods and services. Yet this textbook model skates over some hard facts of the international trading system. First, tariffs are far from the most significant barriers to trade in the modern global economy. More significant are non-tariff barriers like rules of origin. Second, there is the question of distance. It costs more to transport goods to dispersed and distant markets, like Australia, than to large, integrated and geographically close markets, notably the European single market. Britain needs a trade deal with the EU if it is to minimise these costs. Third, eliminating tariffs unilaterally would deprive Britain of leverage in the bilateral trade agreements that Dr Fox hopes to negotiate. Finally, eliminating import tariffs would wipe out large parts of British industry. British dairy farming would face tariffs of more than 50 per cent when selling into the European single market, while having to compete with imports at zero tariffs. Average tariffs on clothing would raise British export prices by 12 per cent in European markets. Car manufacturers would face average tariffs of 10 per cent. These are direct costs to Britain of relying on zero tariffs in a no-deal scenario. The prominent pro-Brexit economist Patrick Minford of Cardiff University told MPs in 2012, with reference to the car industry, that if Britain left the European customs union "you will have a change in the situation facing that industry, and you are going to have to run it down". Running down a successful manufacturing industry that employs more than 160,000 people, along with other vital sectors, is surely not what voters envisaged in 2016. The government has a duty to ensure that it is not what they get.
