 The recent rally is hard to justify, so investors should expect more volatility Summer has brought with it a combination of insights and ­developments that have befuddled investors and confused commentators, but the outlook for 2019-20 remains mostly unchanged.
A terrible drought, retreating house prices, evaporating consumer confidence, a wobbling Chinese economy, consecutive downgrades to global growth by the IMF, decelerating domestic economic growth and a slower pace of US corporate earnings growth all suggest higher share price multiples are difficult to ­justify.
And yet, the US stockmarket, as measured by the S&P 500, has rallied 15 per cent since Christmas Eve to mid-February to register a CAPE ratio (Robert Shiller’s ­cyclically adjusted PE) of 29.75. There have only been two occasions since 1870 that the US stockmarket was equally or more ­expensive.
Australian consumers’ confidence has been described by Westpac as having “evaporated”.
It’s perhaps no surprise that consumer confidence and spending is declining. Record debt used to fuel a property boom has emptied consumer pockets and now the property boom is turning to bust with an estimated 350,000 households in negative equity if property ­prices decline another 10 per cent, as they did in 2018.
A plunge in consumer confidence, the impact of elevated levels of household debt, anxiety about this year’s federal election outcome and forecasts of a deeper downturn in property are enough to detract from reasonable rates of economic growth and strengthening employment conditions.
Due to tightening credit conditions, vanishing foreign property buyers and heavy indebtedness, Australia is now experiencing its biggest property price falls since records began ­almost 40 years ago; Sydney house prices are falling the fastest in two decades and, with fears of a Labor victory, the slide isn’t ­expected to stop any time soon.
While the long-held belief among many economists is that a tightening jobs market will produce higher wages, followed by inflation and then higher interest rates, borrowers may be able to breathe a sigh of relief because it’s unlikely to happen any time soon. In fact, if there is one thing sure to cause a market meltdown ahead, it’s a recession.
To be fair, moving past “peak growth” (the US economy is estimated to be growing at close to 3 per cent a year) is not the same as an economic “contraction”, but the downgrades to growth are ­becoming louder.
Goldman Sachs recently cut its 2019 GDP growth forecast to just 2.1 per cent, from 2.4 per cent previously. In another report, Reuters polled 100 economists cutting their first-quarter forecast to an annualised rate of 2.1 per cent.
And finally, according to the Beige Book, which reports the ­anecdotal information on current economic conditions from bank and branch directors and interviews with key business contacts, economists and market experts, collected by each of the district Federal Reserves, US company optimism is waning with firms ­retreating from investment plans and pulling back 2019 forecasts.
Residential and commercial builders in the US say they are ­“beginning to scramble for new projects to keep their workers ­employed”. And then we come to China.
Chinese retail sales growth rates have plunged from roughly 11 per cent 2017 to just 8 per cent today. Meanwhile, total import growth is negative and semiconductor imports have fallen by a third in US dollar value.
China’s GDP in the fourth quarter grew at 6.4 per cent, if their numbers are to be believed, which is the slowest in a decade. The annualised rate, 6.6 per cent, is the slowest in ­almost three decades.
Of course, The Australian has been replete with stories of President Xi Jinping warning of “serious dangers” — presumably to his hold on power — as risks mount.
The effects of China’s slowdown are being felt not only in the Chinese halls of power, but across the globe, including in Europe where Germany recorded economic growth of just 1.5 per cent last year, the slowest in half a decade.
The Chinese slowdown has prompted Harvard professor, chess Grandmaster and world ­expert on financial crises, Kenneth Rogoff, to warn that China is in the grip of a “dangerous downturn” that “is rapidly becoming the greatest single threat to the global financial system”.
The world’s monetary and fiscal policies are hardly prepared for another shock, but Rogoff fears China’s latest malady could be “the third leg of the global debt ­supercycle, after subprime in the US and the eurozone crisis” and, while nobody knows the precise path that will be taken, “it could be on the scale of 2008 and will be very bad for Asia”.
Which brings us back home. Thirty per cent of our exports go to China each year, and with retail and property in the doldrums and business anxiety about a Labor victory stifling investment and ­optimism, it seems the January stockmarket rally is difficult to justify. I would expect 2019 to see ­several bouts of stockmarket volatility before the year is out.
Some see that as risk, but if you are a net buyer, think of it as ­opportunity. Roger Montgomery is founder and chief investment officer of the Montgomery Fund.www.montinvest.com
