 WORLD COMMENTARY
Every year a few women become the first of their sex to hold a particular job. The stars of 2018 include Tennessee’s first female senator and the first female head of the New York Stock Exchange. There is the occasional male first, too: in 2018 the first men graduated from Norland College, which trains nannies for rich British families. Each year, a few occupations abandon sex-based hiring restrictions: in October, Britain’s Special Air Service decided to admit women for the first time.
Fifty years ago this would have been unimaginable. “The hilarity of the notion that all jobs should be open to both sexes spawned a running joke,” writes Gillian Thomas in Because of Sex, her book on the impact of Title VII of America’s 1964 Civil Rights Act. Officials liked to quip that the law had created a “Bunny problem”: men would have to be considered for employment as scantily clad waitresses in Playboy clubs. It took court cases to end bans on male flight attendants and female railway workers.
Today, across the West, almost all jobs are open to both sexes. That has brought economic gains: 25 per cent of the growth in output per worker in the US between 1960 and 2010 can be attributed to improved talent allocation due to integration by sex and race, according to Chang-Tai Hsieh of the University of Chicago and his colleagues. But most sex-based integration happened in the 1970s and 1980s, and mostly in white-collar jobs. It has since largely stalled.
Most men still work mostly with men, and most women with women. In the EU, 69 per cent of women with jobs are in female-dominated occupations (that is, in which more than 60 per cent of workers are female). In Germany, 69 per cent of working men are in jobs where at least 70 per cent of their colleagues are male. In the US, some of the commonest occupations for women — primary school teaching, nursing and secretarial work — are at least 80 per cent female. About half of the US workforce would need to switch professions to bring the labour market into perfect balance between the sexes.
This occupational segregation has consequences for earnings. It accounts for one-third of the US’s gender pay gap, according to Francine Blau and Lawrence Kahn of Cornell University. Together, occupational segregation and the simple scarcity of women in senior jobs explain most of Sweden’s pay gap. Female-dominated jobs are mostly lower-paid than mixed or male-dominated ones. Of the 30 highest-paying occupations in the US, 26 are male-dominated; of the 30 lowest-paying ones, 23 are female-dominated. In Europe, hourly pay is 35 per cent lower in the most feminised workplaces than in mixed ones.
Though women are now as well-qualified as men, they are more likely to enter lower-paid occupations with fewer opportunities for progression. Moreover, jobs that women do may be paid less precisely because women do them. When women enter a male occupation, wages tend to fall. In her “pollution” theory of discrimination, Harvard economist Claudia Goldin posits that men in male-dominated jobs fear that, if women move in, the work will be deemed to have become easier and less worthy of decent pay and status.
What keeps women in “pink” jobs and men in “blue” ones? There is no reason to expect a 50-50 split in every occupation, says Blau. “But if the question is ‘Are we there yet?’ we have enough evidence to answer with a resounding ‘no’.” Female graduates in science, technology, engineering and mathematics are less likely than their male peers to get a job in their field, and are more likely to leave if they do. Women in male-dominated jobs suffer more harassment and discrimination than those in mixed occupations. Parenthood increases segregation: having mothers in flexible, lower-paying jobs and fathers in inflexible, higher-paying ones, suggests motherhood influences and constrains career choices.
Employers in male-dominated sectors increasingly fear that a dearth of women is bad for business. Studies have linked mixed-sex teams variously to improvements in productivity, innovation, safety and profitability. At BHP, flexible working and creative recruiting have helped halve female turnover since 2016 and increased women’s share of the workforce by 40 per cent. That has brought business benefits. BHP’s most diverse teams outperform the average by about 15 per cent on measures such as meeting production forecasts, sticking to timetables and — because female miners are gentler on gears and more likely to respond to alarm lights — cutting maintenance costs. The number of injuries is about half that in male-dominated teams doing similar work.
For women who do not want to go into male fields, what matters is an end to the pattern of devaluing women’s work compared with men’s. Because women are over-represented in low-wage jobs, minimum wages can have a large effect. Broadly, US states with a minimum wage above the federal level have narrower gender pay gaps than those without.
Most Western countries have had laws enshrining equal pay since the 1970s. Over time, these have gone beyond ensuring the same pay for the same job to requiring equal pay for work of equal value.
The most thorough effort to effect this in white-collar jobs is in Iceland, where companies must prove that they pay fairly across occupations. Many have struggled. One of the first to go through the process was Arion Bank. Most salary corrections were upwards, but some employees’ pay was cut.
Does it matter for society at large that nearly all early years educators are female and nearly all firefighters are male? Finland used to set quotas for men in primary school teaching. Some would like them back. “If more women were in traditionally ‘masculine’ jobs, then women on the whole would earn more,” says Kate Bahn of Equitable Growth, a research institute in Washington. “And if more men were in ‘feminine’ jobs, then these jobs would pay better to all.” Higher wages may mean costs for others, but society may deem that a price worth paying.THE ECONOMIST
