 China’s slowing economy is sending shock waves through its trading partners around the world.
Beijing’s struggle with domestic weaknesses, including a huge debt build-up, overinvestment and constraints on private businesses, are combining with trade tensions to drag down growth in the world’s second-largest economy to its slowest rate in three decades.
The fall-off in factory production and consumption is taking a toll on how much China buys from companies elsewhere in Asia, the US and Europe. And the slowdown is rippling far beyond stock indexes, retarding economic growth far from China’s shores.
Years of rapid growth have made China a major trading partner for countries around the world. Over the last decade, it accounted for a fifth of the total growth in global exports and imports, and played a key role in supporting demand during periods of weakness such as the eurozone’s financial crisis.
Economic frailty in China now is felt everywhere. Falling demand in China for semiconductor processing equipment and smartphone parts drove down exports from Japan, the world’s third-largest economy, by 3.8 per cent in December from a year earlier, the largest decline in more than two years.
Germany worked hard to gain exports to China, but that exposure is a central reason why Europe’s largest economy grew only 1.5 per cent last year, its slowest pace in five years. Exports to China from large developed economies including the US and other Asian countries were nearly 10 per cent lower last year from 2017, according to Oxford Economics.
“China now has been such a major contributor to global growth that when it slows, that has impact all around the world,” said Shane Oliver, chief economist at AMP Capital.
The dynamic has amped up competitive pressures across Asia, as Chinese industries that aren’t selling as much at home turn to exports as a way out of trouble. For Europe, the trend threatens a big, new headwind as the continent’s economy sags under political uncertainty and trade disputes. In the US, softening sales to China are putting an end to a three-year boom for some manufacturers.
China is a major market for many American manufacturers, and its slowdown has vexed companies from industrial bellwethers Caterpillar and 3M to smaller firms like tanneries and tool producers. Caterpillar warned this week of narrower profit growth this year, blaming slower sales in China.
Germany’s Continental, a leading automotive supplier, expects Chinese auto production to fall by double digits in January compared with 2018, a development finance chief Wolfgang Schafer says will have “a direct impact on our order book”.
The slowdown is hitting Asia especially hard.
Asian countries sell China products from clothes and cars to the technology that powers the country’s manufacturing behemoth. China’s falling appetite became sharply visible late last year, a drop-off belied by full-year data reflecting healthier times. That was especially the case for semiconductors, a sector that accounts for 15 per cent of China’s imports and is indispensable for the country’s growth.
South Korean chip maker SK Hynix last week said its profits fell by 28 per cent from the third to the fourth quarter of 2018, attributed to weaker Chinese demand for high-end smartphones and uncertainties from the US-China trade fight. South Korea, which sends a quarter of its exports to China, saw its export revenue fall by 14 per cent in December from a year earlier.
For Europe, China’s slowdown hits amid political troubles including Britain’s looming exit from the European Union and protests in France over economic grievances. The continent is also suffering from a trade tiff with the US, and its biggest economy, Germany, narrowly avoided a technical recession last year.
In recent years, China has become a much more important customer for European manu­facturers. By 2017, China had become the second-largest export market for the bloc after the US. It accounted for 10.5 per cent of EU exports in 2017, up from 5.8 per cent in 2007.
Adidas, the world’s second-largest sportswear maker, warned in November its business in China would slow in the final quarter of the year.
Chinese retail sales growth weakened to near-record lows late last year. Slowing consumer spending is manifesting elsewhere, too.
Hong Kong-based jewellery and watch companies reported a sharp slowdown in the last months of 2018, largely due to weak demand from Chinese customers.
Jeweler Luk Fook this month said same-store sales fell 10 per cent in the last three months of the year from a year earlier, with a 14 per cent drop in mainland China. Same-store sales at Chow Tai Fook Jewellery fell 7 per cent in mainland China in the period.
The China slowdown has helped some Asian manufacturing rivals that have displaced their Chinese competitors in recent years by becoming the cheaper exporter to some markets.
Rafeeque Ahmed, a footwear exporter in the Indian city of Chennai, said his wares have become more attractive to US customers facing tariff-laden Chinese competitors. He said his export sales this year could rise 25 per cent from last year, to $US200 million. Those brighter prospects have attracted Taiwanese investors trying to decide whether to move their manufacturing facilities from China, he said.
“It is impacting us favourably,” Mr Ahmed said.His enthusiasm may be premature. “China will try to push their exports to all countries, more so in Asia because of the proximity,” said Madan Sabnavis, chief economist at Mumbai-based Care Ratings.
