 SPEECH Almost two-thirds of communication is not about relaying facts
Dan Mallory’s first novel, a psychological thriller, entered The New York Times bestseller list at No 1. He is a handsome and charming man-about-town.
He is also, according to a recent profile in TheNew Yorker, an extravagant liar: about surviving tumours, losing his mother to cancer, having two doctorates and much besides. Mallory — real name AJ Finn — impersonated his brother in emails to support these lies before killing him off, telling friends he had committed suicide. The brother is alive and well.
Asked what language is for, many people are likely to say “to communicate”; some might add, “to convey information about the world”. Spectacular cases such as Mallory’s show this is not always the case. Sometimes, people lie.
Yet, outlandish as his story seems, in a sense Mallory’s use of language may not be that unusual.
Only a minority of remarks are “propositional” — that is, assertions that purport to be true.
One study at Stanford University looked at more than 1000 five-minute conversations between strangers; the researchers tagged bits of the exchanges by their function. Each tagged utterance was more or less a complete bit of speech, ranging from “Me, I’m in the legal department” to a plain “no”. They found that just 36 per cent of utterances even purported to be statements of fact.
What are speakers doing the rest of the time? The next biggest category (19 per cent) was “acknowledge (backchannel)”: things like “uh-huh”. A further 5 per cent of utterances were “agree-accept” responses (“That’s exactly it”); 2 per cent were “appreciation” (“I can imagine”). People spend a lot of speech time letting the other person know they are listening.
Conversation is co-operation.
In other words, conveying facts about reality is only one of language’s functions. It is also a tool to create new realities: in the case of a conversation, a social bond.
Seen in this light, Mallory’s lies look less like an aberration and more like an extreme form of social performance. He has not commented on the scandal in detail, but it may be that he didn’t so much want the world to think he had two doctorates as merely hope to be liked and admired. Most people want the same.
Outright fibs aside, language that isn’t strictly propositional might sometimes be called “expressive”. Take, for example, religious creeds. Many Christians admit they doubt the miracles of the Bible. But they will recite the Nicene Creed — a statement of faith that includes the physical resurrection of Jesus — and not feel they are lying or hypocrites.
If a fact is being imparted, it is not “Jesus was resurrected” but rather “I am a Christian, and it is important that I say this”.
Many thoughtful modern theo­logians join philosophers like Wittgenstein in seeing creedal statements this way. If they are right, atheists waste their breath when they debunk biblical stories.
Religion is not the only context in which people speak to express themselves rather than to propound facts. That Barack and Michelle Obama have a high wall around their house, as US President Donald Trump said in December, was quickly shown to be false. But Trump is so prone to this kind of thing that fact-checking may miss the point. He is conveying something about himself (in this case, his disdain for liberal hypocrites, whether they have a wall or not) rather than saying true things about the world.
When they elected him, many supporters wanted a fighter on their side, not a Wikipedia editor.
All this can lead to difficulties. Most people, when they talk, expect leeway for opinion, exaggeration, self-expression, evasion or irony — all the niceties, quips and obfuscation that make up so much chat. Yet they often make insufficient allowance for those nuances when others are speaking, or miss the relevant cues.
Consider the naif who takes it literally when a spouse says: “It’s OK, I’m fine. You go ahead.” The later row (“You said it was fine!”) can be frustrating for all involved.
There are indeed places where what is said is supposed to be factual: legal testimony, say, or scientific research.
But these are the exceptions — artificially regulated environments in which the natural foibles of speech stand out. Human beings would sound awfully odd if they talked that way all the time.
A partial tonic for confusion would be for everyone to realise just how much language is non-propositional. Another tactic is talking about talking more.
Asking an interlocutor: “Are you expressing yourself or proposing a fact?” may not make for charming conversation. But it may prevent misunderstandings.THE ECONOMIST
