 Once and (probably) future United States presidential candidate Bernie Sanders has presided over a resurgence of interest in socialism in America.
Other socialist leaders, such as newly elected congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, are making their presence felt.
With their discipleship concentrated among younger cohorts of voters, the future looks rosy for the Left wing in the US.
At first blush, this seems quite remarkable given the manner in which the label "socialist" was treated like a swear word in America for much of the last century.
However, younger voters today were born years after the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Criticisms of socialism are bound to lack the punch they had when it was the ideology of a totalitarian empire, which had vowed to conquer the West.
In the years since, socialists have worked hard to rebrand the cause.
Sanders, for example, often goes to pains to say that what he has in mind resembles how things are run in Scandinavia.
It is a familiar talking point. Mention the ongoing humanitarian crisis in socialist Venezuela and you're sure to have the line parroted back to you by fellow travellers.
The problem is that the Nordic countries do not have socialist economies.
They operate market systems with comprehensive welfare states bolted on to them and paid for by the stiff taxation of middle-income earners. That is not what socialism is.
But you don't have to take my word for that.
Lars Løkke Rasmussen, the prime minister of Denmark, touched on the subject in a speech to the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University in 2015.
"I know that some people in the US associate the Nordic model with some sort of socialism," he said, before averring that "Denmark is far from a socialist planned economy" and instead is "a market economy".
Neoliberalism - the label socialists often give to market economies - is not actually opposed to welfare.
When the economist John Williamson developed the concept of "the Washington Consensus" in 1989, he described policy prescriptions that had become accepted as the way to revitalise an economy.
One of these was redirection of public expenditures away from subsidies - including corporate welfare - and towards investment in things that help the disadvantaged, like the provision of health and education services.
You can't really get more neoliberal than The Economist.
The London-based magazine has been the journal of classical liberalism since 1843.
Karl Marx famously dismissed it as "the European organ of the aristocracy of finance".
And yet just last year, it printed an editorial entitled "Capitalism needs a welfare state to survive".
Conceding that no system was perfect, it praised "support for parents to return to work as in Scandinavia, personal budgets for disabled people to select their own provision as in England, or Singapore-style learning accounts so that the jobless can acquire new skills".
All this was framed in liberal terms and in contradiction to the socialism the magazine has always rejected.
If it's not welfare, what is socialism? Socialism occurs when the state replaces the private sector to substitute central planning for market forces.
Where a social democrat gives money to the poor to buy food, the socialist seeks to take over the farms and control the distribution of food.
A mild example of socialism in New Zealand is KiwiBuild.
The programme was founded on the premise that the market has failed and that salaried Wellington bureaucrats would be better at providing new houses than anyone in the private construction sector.
In making that assumption, the Government bit off more than it could chew as a month's worth of embarrassing stories about the programme shows.
In the words of the housing minister, the task has proved "tougher than we expected". Quite.
Business is usually much harder than it looks to people who have never really tried it before.
HomeStart grants are a useful counter-example.
These provide cash to lower-income earners looking to buy their first - and in some cases, second - home and are classic examples of welfare.
The programme, which has been maintained and expanded by previous Labour and National governments, is far from perfect.
It has, however, helped thousands of New Zealanders reach their property ownership aspirations - the writer included.
This may seem like splitting hairs.
After all, if the meaning of socialism has evolved to encompass much milder strains of Left wing politics then what's the harm?
The trouble is that the difference between what happens in Denmark or New Zealand and what happens in Venezuela or Cuba is not simply a difference in degree, it is a difference in kind and nature. If we are too indiscriminate in how we use the terms, we risk conflating the concepts also.
That would be a shame.
CAPTION:
Newly elected congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez is making her presence felt. AP
