 Doubts about the domestic economy increased this week, even as the sharemarket consolidated and the dollar rose as the Federal Reserve confirmed a pause in US interest rate increases.
NAB’s monthly business survey revealed the biggest month-on-month fall in business conditions since the global financial crisis of 2008, the Reserve Bank’s measure of private sector credit recorded the lowest year-on-year growth since early 2014, and CoreLogic’s home value index in January showed house prices were still falling at the fastest month-on-month pace since 2008.
Global economic data were also soft, with China’s manufacturing purchasing manager’s indexes remaining in contraction territory, German retail sales disappointing and Italy falling into a recession.
Meanwhile macroeconomic headwinds including uncertainty about the US budget, the US-China tariff war and Brexit were yet to be resolved and funding costs remained elevated.
The extent to which the RBA acknowledges the risk of a worse than expected domestic economic outlook will be closely watched next week, with the board meeting on Tuesday, governor Philip Lowe speaking at the National Press Club on Wednesday and the central bank’s statement on monetary policy — including updated economic forecasts — due for release on Friday.
It comes amid an uncertain week for the nation’s major lenders with the final report of the banking and financial services royal commission due to be released after the close of trading on Monday.
And with NAB’s monthly business survey for January due on February 12, it won’t be long before economists can confirm whether the sharp fall in January was a rogue number.
NAB economists said this week that while employment, capex and capacity utilisation were above average, employment had declined recently and capex had been unusually volatile.
“Moreover, as they can be lagging indicators their current above-average readings may simply reflect the past strength in business conditions,” they said. “Indeed, forward orders may suggest a slowing in future demand that could see further weakening in conditions.” Economists don’t expect the RBA to cut rates any time soon, but it is likely to lower its current economic growth forecasts of 3.5 per cent for 2018 and 3.25 per cent for 2019 on a year-ended basis after growth slowed to 2.8 per cent in the September quarter, the global economy weakened, business conditions and house prices fell and retailers reported a tough Christmas.
And with consumer price inflation data this week showing headline price increases on a year-on-year basis remained below the RBA’s 2-3 per cent target band for the 15th of the past 16 quarters, the central bank has scope to cut rates again without causing an outbreak of inflation.
Indeed, the RBA’s core inflation forecasts of 2.25 per cent for 2019 and 2020 — notwithstanding some pick-up in wages growth — may also be downgraded, as has been the pattern of recent years.
“Consistent with its global counterparts, the RBA is likely to acknowledge the softer global growth outlook and greater risks as well as their implications for Australia,” RBC Capital Markets macro rates strategist Robert Thompson said.
“While likely to confirm decent growth in Australia and a ­labour market that remains in good shape, it will also be forced to cut its overly optimistic GDP and inflation forecasts for 2019, signalling a weakening of its mild tightening bias.” But even if it trimmed its economic forecasts, they could still imply a mild tightening bias, with above-trend growth and inflation eventually moving back within target range, he added.
What may be more significant is whether any RBA communication includes the well-worn phrase, last repeated in the minutes of December 18, that the “next move is up” albeit not for a while.
“Well aware of market pricing and speculation, the omission of this phrase would signal a shift to neutral and somewhat less confidence in the set of macro forecasts,” Mr Thomson said.
“Given the shift in tone from global central banks, markets ­appear well priced for this.” Morgan Stanley strategists Chris Nicol and Daniel Blake said their “AlphaWise” survey of 1800 mortgagors in Australia warned of tighter credit conditions, worsening housing sentiment and pressure on household finances, which had implications for the corporate earnings, interest rate expectations, and the dollar.
“This reinforces our view that Australian consumers are now dealing with a domestic cash flow and credit crunch driven by weak income growth, ‘cost of living’ inflation, and a change in bank behaviour,” they said.In light of rising “recessionary risks” in Australia, Morgan ­Stanley yesterday removed its forecast that the RBA would start lifting rates in 2020 and flagged a move to an easing bias over the year.
