 As the nation prepares for a May federal election, expect to hear plenty of speculation about how the campaign could drag on economic conditions because of the uncertainty it creates.
In the past few weeks of corporate profit results, a handful of chief executives have already pointed to state and federal elections as a reason for being cautious in their outlook. And in a superficial way, this makes sense.
Elections create uncertainty, by definition. So, it may seem fair to assume this affects how households and businesses behave across the economy.
However, is there any evidence the economy takes a breather during the rough and tumble of an election campaign?
To test out the "widely held belief" that the economy slows into an election, ANZ economists David Plank and Bansi Madhavani crunched various numbers spanning the lead-up to the past 14 federal elections going back to the 1980s.
The economists examined four important and frequent economic indicators: the unemployment rate, retail sales, consumer confidence and business conditions.
They looked at data from the three months leading up to the month of an election and compared that with the average readings from three months and six months before that.
Their analysis found the data that appears to move around most in the election lead-up relates to employment.
When you compare the amount of jobs growth in the three months before an election with an average from seven to nine months earlier, they said there was "a material slowdown in employment growth as the election gets closer."
However, this didn't translate into meaningful change in the unemployment rate, which is perhaps the most fundamental measure of the health of the labour market.
Next, they looked at retail sales. Again, it seems there's no evidence that consumers suddenly decide to tighten their purse strings in response to election hype.
"On some occasions, retail sales growth accelerates into the election and on some occasions it slows, but the differences are minor," they write.
Consumer confidence doesn't support the claim that elections slow down growth either. In contrast, they found there's a "small tendency" for consumer sentiment to increase in the lead up to an election, though the difference is small.
Business conditions also failed to support the conventional wisdom about the effect of elections. In some elections, conditions have improved compared with the past and in others they worsened.
Their conclusion is that elections might have an impact on hiring decisions but, beyond that, they were not able to point to any major changes in economic activity that occurs.
So, why the assumption that elections dampen activity?
Well, election uncertainty can certainly have specific impacts on more narrow parts of the economy, such as the real estate market.
Citi analysts report that during a six-week period of the last election campaign, REA Group, owner of realestate.com.au, experienced a 15 per cent decline in listings. This was one reason for its soft guidance this month, which also hit the share price of Domain, which is majority-owned by Money's publisher, Nine.
The effect on property may be especially strong in this year's election, given taxation of housing investment is a key point of difference between the Coalition government and Labor, which wants to restrict negative gearing to newly built homes and cut capital gains concessions.
Although listings have slowed, however, some experts argue there could also be a burst of demand from property investors looking to snap up an established property they can negatively gear while the law still allows it.
Labor's pledge to stop cash refunds for people who pay no tax and have excess franking credits is also bound to affect share prices of large dividend-paying companies, such as big banks, miners, or retailers.
Election results can have a material impact on investments and the economy more broadly.
But thankfully, consumers and business owners seem to prefer to just get on with their lives during the hype of a campaign - and there's little evidence the political fuss has a strong economy wide effect.
