 Enlarge this image.
" Economists concerned over fiscal deficit slippages this and next year     ""The Interim Budget 2019-20 shows that the fiscal deficit for the current fiscal will breach the budgeted estimate (BE) of 3.3% of GDP at Rs 6.24 lakh crore by 0.1 percentage point.
A revised fiscal deficit of 3.4% of GDP at Rs 6.34 lakh crore was narrower than what was expected. In FY18, it had come at 3.5% of GDP at Rs 5.9 lakh crore against the budgeted 3.3% of GDP.
"Budget 2019-20 reflects the government's firm commitment to substantially boost investment in agriculture, social sector, education and health. This is substantiated by an increase in expenditure of Rs 3,26,965 crore over revised estimate (RE) (2018-19) while keeping the fiscal deficit at 3.4% of GDP," the government's Budget document stated.
The government has revised the total expenditure by Rs 15,022 crore to Rs 24. 57 lakh crore compared to the budgeted estimate (BE) for the current fiscal. The fiscal deficit for FY20 has been revised 30 basis points to 3.4% of GDP.
Ranen Banerjee, leader at PwC <loc>India</loc>, said there were "risks" to attaining the revised fiscal deficit estimate. "One of the assumptions is the disinvestment target will still be met. We have to see how the disinvestment target (Rs 80,000 crore) is achieved, how fast the revenue collection happens in the next two months (before the election code kicks in March) and how their performance will determine the final number," he said.
The government has raised Rs 35,000 crore of budgeted divestment till now.
D K Srivastava, chief policy advisor, EY <loc>India</loc>, said slippage in the fiscal deficit has been contained mostly because of assumptions of higher non-tax revenues; "a lower slippage is being shown due to the increase in non-tax revenue, where the actual dividend from the RBI to the tune of Rs 20,000 crore has been shown. It also depends on an increase in corporate tax revenues of Rs 60,000 crore," he said.
He attributed the bigger miss in FY20 to the farm income support scheme that has been introduced in the Interim Budget this year. "The 3.4% is a larger slippage for FY20. If the burden on account of the farm income support programme actually increases in magnitude then that would become a cause of concern," he said.
The EY economist was also worried about the quality of fiscal deficit as "capital expenditure actually came down to 1.6% of GDP. Apart from other things, the quality of fiscal deficit is such that only 48% of the fiscal deficit is accounted for capital expenditure."
Devendra Kumar Pant, chief economist and senior director (public finance) at <loc>India</loc> Ratings and Research, said the revised fiscal deficit estimate "looked slightly stressed". The government revised the gross tax revenue estimate for the current fiscal to Rs 22.48 lakh crore from the BE of Rs 22.71 lakh crore. ""Highlights
Financial markets cheered Budget proposals, Sensex closes 212 point gains after spiking of 522 intraday
A major portion of the estimated 3 crore middle-class taxpayers expected to benefit from Income Tax relief likely to invest the tax savings of up to Rs 18,500 crore into financial investments
Shares of real estate firms gained up to 4% after the government proposed extending tax sops given to these companies for developing affordable housing until next fiscal and tax exemption on notional rent for unsold inventories for two years.
Banking stocks were the other top laggards, with YES Bank, State Bank of <loc>India</loc>, ICICI Bank and Axis Bank falling up to 4.68%""7.61% the 10-year benchmark bond yield rose on expectation of government borrowings
Rs71.25 per dollar was the rupee closing on Friday weakening 17 paise""What they say
Adherence to fiscal prudence despite providing benefits to middle-class, farmers will revitalise economy, which bodes well for the capital markets.
Ashishkumar Chauhan, MD & CEO, BSE ""Expanding rural industries using modern digital tech will increase consumption and provide thrust to local manufacturing
Thomas John Muthoot, chairman & MD, Muthoot Pappachan""<loc>India</loc> Inc. can now look at expanding their customer/investor base, from the additional liquidity that will arise from the increase in income
Anand Rathi, chairman, Anand Rathi Financial""62.70 pts or 0.58%, rise in Nifty as the investor's sentiment was boosted
7.48% gain in HeroMotoCorp stock, making it best performer on Sensex on Friday
Rs15.022 cr is the revised total expenditure by govt for current fiscal
Rs22.48L cr is the revised estimate for the gross tax revenue
"
