 <loc>British</loc> manufacturers are stockpiling goods at the fastest rate since records began in preparation for a disorderly Brexit, according to a closely followed economic monitor. With less than 60 days to go before Britain is due to leave the European Union, the lack of political certainty is putting pressure on margins, supply chains and storage facilities, manufacturers warn as they rush to hoard raw materials and parts. Inventory holdings in January rose at the fastest pace since 1992, according to the purchasing managers' index compiled by IHS Markit. Stockpiling has gathered pace amid concerns that the <loc>UK</loc> could crash out of the EU without a deal, bringing trade problems and a potential shortage of goods. Several leading companies, including WH Smith, Fortnum & Mason, Tesco and Siemens, have announced plans to hold extra stocks. Unilever became the latest to outline its preparations on Thursday when it said that it was raising stocks of Ben and Jerry's and Magnum ice cream. The PMI survey asks businesses whether conditions are better, worse or the same on a variety of subjects, such as the level of new orders and purchasing intentions, before taking the net position of the responses. Any reading above 50 represents expansion. Until now, a rise in stockpiling activity has helped to sustain growth in the sector, but it was unable to provide a significant boost to output in January. The latest index read 52.8, down from 54.2 in December and its second weakest level since the EU referendum vote in July 2016. Economists had been expecting a reading of 53.5. The news caused sterling to weaken, sliding 0.32 per cent against the dollar to $1.3038 before a recovery to $1.3095. It marks a reversal from last month's findings, which showed that activity in the manufacturing sector was growing at its fastest rate in six months. Economists had warned previously that the positive impact of stockpiling was likely to be shortlived. Samuel Tombs, of Pantheon Macroeconomics, said: "Contingency planning for a no-deal Brexit is providing only limited support to manufacturers at a time of weakening underlying demand, both in the domestic and export markets." Small and medium-sized businesses are finding it more difficult to cope with the operational challenges presented by stockpiling. David Fagan, of the EEF manufacturers' organisation, warned that excessive stockpiling was adding to costs as businesses were being forced to spend more on storage facilities and were running down capital by buying new stock instead of investing in their operations. He warned that excessive stock left businesses vulnerable as it limited their ability to respond flexibly to changes in the market. "It is a big concern for our members and something they could probably do without," he said. Rob Dobson, director at IHS Markit, said: "Despite the temporary boost provided by clients' pre-purchases and efforts to build up stocks, the underlying trends in output and new orders remained lacklustre at best." CREDIT: Gurpreet Narwan Economics Correspondent
