 Strap: When <loc>India</loc> adopted inflation targeting, it chose CPI instead of WPI because food prices were key for the consumer. To look at anything else would be shifting the goal post, writes Atmadip Ray Kolkata: Economics has always retained legitimate space for human emotion to counterbalance stone-cold logic that provides the superstructure to the science of money. This was evident in Mint Road's rate decision last week, when policy bosses at the central bank voted 4-2 to reduce borrowing costs in an economy where 'core inflation' still remains stubborn.
Did the pragmatic prevail over the overtly academic? Or, did the monetary policy committee of the central bank stick to its pre-set inflation management objective in announcing the surprise reduction and change to its policy stance?
To be sure, Reserve Bank of <loc>India</loc> (RBI) deputy governor Viral Acharya differed with the governor and the majority view on the benign inflation outlook narrative. Acharya and external member Chetan Ghate voted against the dovish policy, and their voting decision appears to have been influenced by what economic policy experts call the 'core inflation', which excludes the effects of food items and motor fuels.
High core inflation is a concern despite the sustained low headline numbers measured by the Consumer Price Index, which takes into account the basket of goods bought by the average consumer.
But the headline retail inflation touched an 19-month low in January to 2.05%, primarily due to sustained deflation in food items and a sharp decline in energy prices. Of course core inflation has also dipped in the last three months but at 5.4%, it still more than RBI's comfort level of 4%.
The Debate Over the Right Gauge "Core inflation better captures the non-volatile components of inflation and the demand-side forces, and is an important consideration for the central bank," said DBS Bank economist Radhika Rao. "But the inflation-targeting framework carries the headline inflation as the main target. February's rate review has signaled that the new governor and the panel would back a symmetry in rate action, focusing primarily on headline inflation."
Goldman Sachs economists Prachi Mishra, Vishal Vaibhaw and Andrew Tilton expect some pick-up in food inflation over the course of this year, as favorable base effects begin to wane and the winter crop (Rabi season) yields lower due to the deficient rains. The Rabi produce would hit the markets around March-April, and rural demand may increases because of federal incentives to farmers and agri-loan waivers.
The central bank, meanwhile, ignored high inflation in the educational and medical services.
"Analysis of core inflation and its evolution with the risks around it are already incorporated in our projections. So, when the path of headline inflation is set out for the next 12-months, we have also taken into account the analytics relating to core inflation and its dynamics, including its elevated level and its stickiness," executive director Michael D Patra told analysts in a post-policy conference, a practice that was shelved by previous Governor Urjit Patel.
Patra voted in favour of a rate cut.
The Recurring Theme Debates on the best inflation benchmark surface every time when monetary policy is seen as the blunt instrument to address supply-side pressures. Despite the seasonal swings in food prices, this component always shapes inflationary expectations and becomes crucial in monetary policy decision-making.
Let's note, the difference between CPI and the wholesale price index (WPI) is about 160 bps. The RBI Act, which was amended in 2016, specified headline CPI as the benchmark for rate action and the MPC is bound by the Act. While RBI targets the realized headline inflation, real interest rates are more closely related to core inflation than to food and fuel prices, said Deputy Governor Acharya.
"Ideally, from the point of view of effectiveness of policy, I think WPI is a better target indicator as it is closer to the producer index. CPI remains weak as very few components are affected by rate changes," said CARE Ratings chief economist Madan Sabnavis. "When repo is increased, we do not cut down on loans for education or health. Nor do housing costs come down. If it was WPI, then producers adjust their credit lines and curb excess demand pressures."
The Rearview Mirror Former RBI Governor Duvvuri Subbarao eased financing cost six times, totaling 425 basis points, to 4.75% between October 2008 and April 2009 ignoring the food prices. Of course food inflation spiraled and led to a long bout of very high inflation, in double digits. This forced Subbarao to tighten the monetary policy and raise interest rate 13 times from March 2010 to October 2011.
"The expansionary budget (for FY20) is likely to lift consumption and demand further, assuming its efficient implementation and that the monies reach the intended beneficiaries... Regarding base effects, clearly the bottom in inflation prints is behind us, with January inflation already expected to inch up," DBS' Rao said.
The RBI, however, does not view the fiscal policy or firm core as an imminent risk to inflation, with projections pointing to sub 4% headline print until at least end-2019.
The central bank's household inflation expectation survey in December 2018 showed people expect a moderation in price rise in the next three months compared to the November survey.
But economists at Goldman Sachs have a hawkish view. "Going forward, as growth picks up, particularly in the second half of 2019, and if the Fed increases rates consistent with our <loc>US</loc> team's forecasts, and food inflation begins to pick up, the pressure on the RBI to shift back to tightening mode is likely to build," Goldman Sachs said in a report. "Taking these factors into account, we continue to expect the RBI to increase rates toward the end of this year - one hike of 25bp each in Q4 2019 and Q1 2020."
