 The cold wind of job cuts is blowing through <loc>China</loc> again this winter, only three years after the last blast, but this time the safety net for workers is much thinner.
Internet-based service ­companies, which served as the employment backstop during the last economic downturn, have themselves fallen on hard times and are only adding fuel to rising lay-off worries.
Online search traffic for the keyword "lay-off" has shot up since December to a level higher than at any time since the beginning of 2011, when such data first became available, according to Baidu Index, a mainland online search-tracking service similar to Google Trends.
The companies repeatedly highlighted in these searches were not just major exporters or manufacturers, but also internet platforms for ride hailing, live streaming and food delivery, the heart of the "life services" or "gig" economy.
Over the past few years, the sector has created a vast number of new entry-level, low-skilled jobs.
The gig economy has thereby absorbed millions of workers who had been laid off by heavy ­industries such as steel and mining since 2016, when <loc>Beijing</loc> launched an economic restructuring campaign to cut excess ­industrial capacity.
Li Xunlei, chief economist at Zhongtai Securities, recently ­estimated that from 2015 to 2017 as many as 33.37 million workers who left first and second-tier ­industrial firms could have begun work in the gig economy.
The sector is also known as the "grey economy" because workers in it are not covered by government statistics.
The flexible scheduling available in many gig economy jobs has also attracted many other Chinese workers to the sector to earn extra money working part time.
But in the face of the ongoing economic slowdown, rapidly saturating markets for their services and stricter regulation by authorities, gig economy firms have fallen on harder times.
This has sharply limited their ability to absorb lay-offs from ­other economic sectors and darkened the outlook for the employment market, even though the creation of a sufficient number of new jobs is the top priority for ­economic decision-makers in <loc>Beijing</loc> this year.
"This safety valve for the job market is not working as well as it used to, as many small businesses and the gig economy are facing an increase in regulatory ­constraints," said Ernan Cui, an ­analyst from research company Gavekal.
The national Ministry of Transport in September started to squeeze "unqualified" ride-hailing drivers, an example of the tighter regulation that is becoming a major constraint on the gig economy.
In November, Didi Chuxing, <loc>China</loc>'s largest ride-hailing ­service operator, said that it would push drivers to obtain both ­licences for themselves and permits for the cars they use.
This regulatory tightening came after two female passengers were killed in May and August last year by rogue Didi drivers, which created a nationwide uproar for better security within the ride-hailing sector.
In some cities, such drivers can now no longer obtain operating permits unless they also possess a local hukou. It is the household registration document that all Chinese citizens must have, and controls access to public services based on the birthplace of the holder, therefore restricting ­drivers from other centres or rural areas who do not hold a hukou for a particular city.
This not only means that many drivers will no longer be able to keep their jobs, adding to unemployment, but it will also make it much harder for workers who have been laid off to find a job as a driver.
Between June 2016 and June 2017, Didi absorbed 3.93 million workers who had been laid off from the industries targeted by the capacity-cutting campaign, the company said in its employment report for 2017.
But since the regulation ­requiring a local hukou for ride-hailing workers in <loc>Shanghai</loc> was introduced in 2016, the number of drivers has slumped sharply.
At the moment, 2.4 per cent of Didi drivers are recognised as residents, according to the company.
In the middle of last year, just 1.1 per cent of the 31.2 million ride-hailing drivers in <loc>China</loc> met all the qualification requirements of the latest municipal regulations. This was according to data from the <loc>China</loc> Academy of ­Information and Communications Technology, a research ­institute under the country's Ministry of Industry and Information Technology.
Meanwhile, those who still have jobs in the gig economy are also feeling the pain.
Didi employees only received half of their expected 2018 year-end bonus and executives got nothing, Cheng Wei, the chief executive officer of the ride-hailing giant, was quoted by ­thePaper.cn as saying at an ­internal meeting last December.
The company was also ­recently considering laying off as many as 25 per cent of its staff, ­according to digital news portal the Information, which cited an anonymous source.
Didi offered no comment when contacted by the Post about the lay-off story.
Meanwhile, live-streaming enterprises - which had a total revenue exceeding 30 billion yuan (HK$35 billion) in 2017 - have also been under pressure, facing a wave of regulatory crackdowns.
Last November, the <loc>Beijing</loc> municipal government announced that it had shut down 530,000 live-streaming channels and 800,000 illegal accounts in the previous three months. This came after it implemented a regulation in August that all live streamers must use their real names when registering.
Earlier, in June 2017, the ­Ministry of Culture closed 12 ­online performance platforms and investigated or penalised 30 applications for violating content regulations.
One of the targets was Huya, <loc>China</loc>'s version of Twitch, which primarily focuses on video game live streaming.
The next move came last month with tightened censorship of short-form videos. The government listed 100 categories of banned content, from smearing the image of Communist Party leaders to "sexual moaning", affecting 594 million users in <loc>China</loc>.
Amid the tougher regulations and a slowing economy, investors took a cautious attitude towards live-streaming companies, leaving many renowned platforms without funding last year.
In December 2018, Chinese internet giant NetEase closed its live-streaming operation, only one year after it was launched.
In the same month, media ­reported that video-streaming site Douyu had suddenly cut the size of its workforce.
And short-form video platform Kuaishou recently stopped using headhunters to find new ­senior staff, according to a recruitment source.
By last month, the average number of daily active live streamers in <loc>China</loc> had decreased 1.3 per cent from the same period last year, and the number of new live streamers had dropped 2.4 per cent, according to data from iresearch.tv, an industry website.
But pressure on <loc>China</loc>'s gig economy has also come from market saturation.
In a report released last year, Meituan Dianping, an online platform that generates most of its revenue from food delivery, said it expected the growth rate of the food delivery market would slow to 18 per cent for 2018 - the fourth consecutive year of deceleration and well below the 71 per cent rise in 2014.
It also projected that the growth rate for food delivery users would drop to 15 per cent in 2018 from 51 per cent four years earlier.
Helped by the rise of mobile payment services, on-demand services had been blossoming and creating job opportunities, with 156,000 laid-off industrial workers employed as food delivery couriers for Meituan in 2017. That accounted for 31 per cent of all active food delivery couriers on the platform that year, according to a report from the <loc>Hong Kong</loc>-listed company.
But recently, Meituan reported that it had cut 250 jobs, adding to concerns about the ability of <loc>China</loc>'s internet companies to generate economic growth.
"Employment in multiple industries might be under pressure in 2019, including the new service industry," said Liang Hong, chief economist at <loc>China</loc> International Capital Corporation.
"The growth of nominal ­income is slowing down, the ­profitability of businesses has ­deteriorated, the downward ­pressures from the real estate ­cycle are accumulating, the growth of ­foreign demand ­remains uncertain and the growth rate of new service industries has shifted downwards."
Meng Wei, spokeswoman for the National Development and Reform Commission, said in late January that no large-scale lay-offs had been seen in the internet-platform industry.
However, she did acknowledge that the Chinese economy and employment market faced downward pressures.
The world's second-largest economy is still pinning its hopes on the gig economy to ensure a stable job market, and thus help to spur consumer spending and economic growth.
Premier Li Keqiang said in mid-January that the country would support the development of "new industries, new formats, and new models" to drive ­employment growth.
And there is some evidence that the grey economy is still ­expanding in <loc>China</loc>.
Zhongtai Securities chief economist Li noted a 10.4 per cent increase in household electricity consumption by urban and rural residents in 2018, compared to a 7.8 per cent gain the year before. Li said this could be a sign that more workers were choosing home-based jobs.
"The growth of the grey economy will be even faster during the economic transformation [the Chinese economy is currently undergoing]," he said.
"A decline in real per capita ­income and a skyrocketing of household electricity consumption will occur at the same time."
Analysts from Everbright ­Securities said the rise of the gig economy meant <loc>Beijing</loc> needed to shift its focus on how to combat unemployment.
"The necessity of stimulating the infrastructure and property markets is dramatically lower than before," they said.
"The rise of life service industries is closely linked with the ­development of the internet, preferential taxes and government subsidies."
However, players within the gig economy remain cautious about the sector's outlook.
"2019 may be the worst year over the past decade, but it will be the best year in the next decade," Wang Xing, the co-founder of Meituan, wrote on his microblog in December.
With <loc>China</loc>'s economy slowing, concern has increased among policymakers about the outlook for workers, with the government enacting policies to counter rising joblessness. In the third part of a series on the country's employment picture, Orange Wang examines the difficulties facing the once-vibrant life services or "grey" market
