 <loc>Sri Lanka</loc>, Feb. 13 -- In my article carried in this column on 06.02.2019 covered auctioning and pricing of Treasury bills, Treasury bonds, Rupee Loans, <loc>Sri Lanka</loc> Development Bonds (SLDBs) and International Sovereign Bonds (ISBs). These are the govt. securities issued to raise debt in an open market. This article outlines selected milestones behind the government securities market development.
Key Legislations
Local Treasury Bills Ordinance (LTBO) in 1932, Registered Stock and Securities Ordinance (RSSO) in 1937, Monetary Law Act (MLA) in 1949 and Foreign Loan Act in 1957 as amended from time to time have provided for developing a government securities market. Legislations are to discipline those who are involved in issuance and dealings in securities.
Under the MLA, the Central Bank (CB) is the banker, fiscal agent, financial adviser and debt manager to the government since 1950. The Public Debt Department (PDD) was set up in the CB in 1950, the year the CB was established, to manage govt. debt although the term "management" is not defined. The MLA stipulates that all securities of the government or govt. agencies should be issued through the CB. Therefore, the CB has taken policy initiatives to develop the govt. securities market. Non-market borrowing such as commercial loans and foreign loans are directly handled by the Treasury.
Treasury bills Market
Issuance and trade of Treasury bills are governed under LTBO and MLA. Treasury bills were first issued as Ceylon Government Treasury bills by the Crown Agents in the <loc>UK</loc> in 1930s. Bills were issued at a fixed discounted price on first-come-first-serve basis. Issuance under Parliamentary approval commenced in 1941 at a fixed discounted price or at times by determination open for banks and corporations. The maturity of bills was mostly one month. Auctioning through competitive bidding by authorized agents commenced in 1950s.
Issuance of 6-month bills and secondary market commenced in 1981. Secondary market facilitates investors to buy and sell securities during the maturity period. Weekly issuance commenced in 1986 in place of fortnightly issuances. The tap system, i.e., issuance at auction weighted average yield to investors, also commenced in 1986 through the CB's regional offices with a view to promote the market among passive retail investors. The tap system/non-competitive bidding was later expanded through authorized agents such as commercial banks. Public sector institutions were the main non-competitive investors. However, the non-competitive bidding was discontinued in 1995 to promote the market trades.
In 1989, maturity of bills was extended to one-year (364 days). Repurchase contracts (repos) and reverse repurchase contracts (reverse repos) were introduced in 1993 and 1995, respectively, for secondary market transactions. A repo is a sale of a security by a dealer for a specific period at a yield rate/price with an agreement to buy the security back at a future date. A reverse repo is the opposite. At present, most investments in Treasury bills are repos.
Under the MLA, the CB is permitted to submit direct tenders to issuances of Treasury bills. This is to facilitate the CB to maintain a short-term government securities portfolio to carry out open market operations in the monetary policy. However, the CB was not permitted to underwrite govt. securities issuances (subscribing to any unsubscribed portion of issuances) to prevent possible market abuses. Inclusion of Treasury bills as a liquid asset in the Banking Act in 1988 facilitated bank investments to promote the market.
Treasury bonds Market
Issuance and trade of Treasury bonds are governed under RSSO and MLA. Issuance of Treasury bonds commenced through auctions in early 1997 to extend the maturity profile of public debt and develop a yield curve for government securities market. The yield curve shows yield rates across all maturities of govt. securities traded in the secondary market on daily basis. It provides credit risk free benchmark interest rates for the private debt markets to decide the risk premium on private debt.
Auctions were open to licensed primary dealing institutions and the EPF. The EPF was permitted to bid directly to auctions (without going through dealers) with a view to neutralize possible unfavourable acts/bidding of primary dealers as the EPF was the largest passive investor in the debt market. As in Treasury bill auctions, investors can bid through primary dealers at yield rates (YTM) they prefer. In order to promote bank investments and trade, Treasury bonds also were declared as a liquid asset permitted for banks to comply with the liquidity regulation.
The non-competitive bidding permitted to the CB-managed internal funds was terminated in 2014 to facilitate the market development. The secondary market, i.e., outright, repo and reverse repo, that had developed in Treasury bills market continued for Treasury bonds too.
During initial years, Treasury bonds were issued for medium-term maturities. Later, maturities were extended to 10 years in 2009, 20 years in 2012 and 30 years in 2013 to extend the maturity profile of debt and establish the yield curve. As on January 1, 2018, there were 57 series of bonds with a face value/maturity value of Rs. 4,263.5 bn maturing up to 2045.
Rupee Loans Market
Rupee loans/securities were issued under RSSO from the beginning of the enactment. They were issued at administratively decided interest rates under tap system without auctions for medium to long-term borrowing. The public sector institutions and funds were the main investors. No secondary market was promoted. However, issuance of Rupee loans has been discontinued in the last decade (i.e., from Rs. 293 bn in 2001 to Rs. 24 bn in 2017) to promote Treasury bonds and other marketable securities.
Domestic Securities Market Infrastructure
In general, market systems contain issuance through primary dealers, secondary market and trading and settlement platforms. Modern markets operate in scripless forms through IT-based trading platforms and securities registries.
* Primary Dealers
Accredited primary dealer (PD) system commenced in 1992 with 8 commercial banks and 3 non-bank institutions. In 1994, PD system was reformed to be 13 commercial banks and 5 non-bank dealers. The dedicated PD system, i.e., separate companies for dealings business, was introduced in 2000. In 2002, commercial banks also were granted PD license to have a separate dealing unit within the bank. At present, there are 12 primary dealers, i.e., 6 banks and 6 non-bank institutions, operating in the market. Three dealers are under business suspension.
Primary dealing companies are given the access to open market operation (OMO) of the CB which are generally open to commercial banks. Accordingly, they can borrow through reverse repos and invest in repos at the CB's OMO window on overnight basis which facilitates their liquidity management through CB's money printing. This facility was suspended in 2006 and re-permitted in 2007. These dealers also are given the access to borrow from the CB's interest free intra-day liquidity facility. This is a facility normally given to banks to ease payment difficulties in order to ensure smooth functioning of the RTGS. Therefore, the dealers have the privilege to use trillions of the CB money printing at low interest rates or free of charge to carry on dealing business.
* Introduction of Technology
a) Scripless Securities
Scripless Securities and electronic bidding to auctions of Treasury bills and bonds commenced in 1998. Until that time, bids were submitted in sealed papers. In 2004, Scripless Securities Settlement System (SSSS) to settle securities electronically on DVP (delivery on payment) basis and electronic Central Depository System (CDS) as the securities registry were introduced at the CB.
Accordingly, payments are effected through Real Time Gross Settlement System (RTGS) of the CB out of dealer accounts maintained at the CB. Issuance and trade of securities in scripless form commenced where ownerships are transferred among the accounts of the dealers and investors at the CDS. Therefore, investors are only issued with CDS statements to certify their investments/dealings whereas no securities certificates are issued in physical form. Upon trading, relevant Primary Dealers electronically make the changes in investor ownerships at the CDS accounts. Therefore, the CDS is solely a trust-based registry.
b) Electronic Trading Platform
However, secondary market trading takes place through over-the-counter as an electronic trading platform similar to stock exchange was not implemented by the CB so far. Therefore, investors have to buy and sell securities with primary dealers through paper orders/bids. In 2015, I arranged formalities to establish an electronic trading platform and the system procurement (Cabinet-appointed procurement committee) process in 2016 through international bidding with the technical assistance (free of charge) of the <loc>US</loc> Govt. Treasury Department. More than 2 years have gone, and no progress has been reported so far.
c) Bloomberg Trading Platform
As an interim arrangement until the trading platform is commissioned, I arranged Bloomberg electronic trading platform (free of charge) to secondary market trading in two stages.
i. Outright Trades
With effect from August 1, 2016, all primary dealers and banks were required to undertake trades of securities among them in the platform and to report all outright deals with investors, each of Rs 50 mn or above, within 30 minutes of the deal to the platform.
The CB undertook to release basic trade information on yields and volumes by each security traded to its website next day morning. The CB also promised to release such information twice during the day to facilitate investors in better transparency and price discovery. However, still only next day reporting is carried, for example, 41 trades for Rs. 6,150 mn for 7th had been reported.
ii. Repo/Reverse Repo Transactions
Secondary market mainly operates in repo/reverse repo transactions. Therefore, on April 26, 2017, all primary dealers and banks were required to quote and trade repos between them in the trading platform and to report in the trading platform repos carried out with investors, each of Rs. 100 mn or above, within 30 minutes of repo transaction. Similar to outright trade, the CB undertook to release daily trade information which has not happened so far.
This mechanism had two objectives. First, it facilitates the transparency, price discovery and liquidity in the market. Second, it provides an information platform for the CB to monitor the conduct of dealers and banks on both online and post-dealings as the PDD did not have secondary market trade information other than the ownerships of securities in the CDS recorded by primary dealers.
* Market Opening to Foreign Investors
Similar to many other countries with relaxed exchange controls, Treasury bills and bonds were open to foreign investments in four stages. First, foreign investments in Treasury bonds were permitted up to 5% of total outstanding bonds in 2006 and 10% in 2008. Second, Treasury bill market also was open in 2008 up to 10%. Third, in 2011, both limits were increased to 12.5% which was reduced to 10% later.
The CB used this to attract more than US$ 3 bn to enhance the competition and liquidity in both government securities market and foreign exchange market. It also offered foreign currency swaps at favourable exchange rates through banks to attract investments. Fourth, some schemes were introduced to attract investments from <loc>Sri Lanka</loc> Diaspora, migrant workers and duel citizens.
A large number of marketing visits were regularly engaged by high-ranking CB officials to promote foreign investments. However, the CB in a latest move reduced the limit back to 5% (2006 level) with effect from 18.01.2019 as communicated on 27.01.2019 without citing any specific reason.
US$ Denominated Bonds Market
* SLDBs
Issuance of SLDBs commenced in 2001 to borrow in US$ onshore through auctions at both fixed interest rates and LIBOR-based floating interest rates. SLDBs are not tradable but can be transferred with prior registration. Bidding and securities take place through scripts/papers. Following a suggestion made by the former Minister of Finance in early 2015 to promote secondary market, an electronic bidding and issuance system was developed in late 2015, but not implemented due to design problems.
* ISBs
Issuance of tradeable ISBs commenced in 2007. ISBs are listed in <loc>Singapore</loc> and issued through bidding handled by a consortium of international investment banks (lead-mangers/book-runners). International credit ratings by Fitch, Moody's and S&P also were obtained to market ISBs. ISBs are promoted to build a <loc>Sri Lankan</loc> sovereign yield curve to facilitate development of an overseas debt market. So far, 12 ISB issuances have taken place for maturities of 5 and 10 years to raise a total of US$ 13.15 bn. However, ISB repayment has already become a burning problem, despite the so-called market development.
Has Debt Market got developed in past 85 years?
As at end of 2017, outstanding debt raised through govt. securities amounted to Rs. 7 trillion. Its share in the total debt stock has increased from 47.7% in 1997 to 67.7% in 2017 (see Table) with a 1.3% reduction between 2017 and 2014.
* Poor Market Development
Revelations during the past four years and present debt service difficulties speak for poor market development, despite above mentioned initiatives in the past 85 years. Several means of administrative issuances of securities outside auctions, conflicts of interest of the CB, grave violations of securities issuances, abused primary dealer system, non-implementation of an electronic trading system, non-implementation of standard market regulations, non-availability of standard governance and internal controls on securities issuances and trade and improper use of the EPF and state funds to subscribe to issuances of securities and secondary market activity are among main factors behind the poor debt market and debt management. This has facilitated securities fraud and stealing of funds in debt by a network of officials and dealers.
In fact, we have not developed a modern debt market, but piled an unmanageable debt stock in the name of market development. Therefore, market debt numbers shown in the table are not reflective of market development, but of rising debt problem.
Thin Market View
Meanwhile, international economists of the CB along with dealers talk about a thin market in <loc>Sri Lanka</loc> (possibly compared to <loc>UK</loc> and <loc>US</loc>) to resist market development initiatives and turn back to administrative debt issuance systems to ensure so-called lowest cost and risk to the government which are not justified with numbers. However, they are fond of market development in ISBs that give them world tours to meet investment bankers, their wealthy investors and other international friends at public funds, despite the thin ISB market for <loc>Sri Lanka</loc>.
Prevention of Public Bankruptcy
Therefore, this is the time to take stock of fundamental issues and hidden facts behind debt numbers and correct them now if the government wishes to prevent a debt bubble burst and public bankruptcy in the coming decade. So-called forensic audits will serve no purpose as they will go under ashes soon, similar to other forensic audits initiated by the CB in the recent past.
If government economists are not interested in debt market discipline and only interested in debt raised by any means due to whatever reasons, the only option the public has is to wait for <loc>Greece</loc>-fashioned-public bankruptcy in the near future.
Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Daily News <loc>Sri Lanka</loc>.
For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
